Transactions on
Human-Computer Interaction
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

THCI
Research Commentary

Applying Functional Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy to Enhance
MIS Research

Hasan Ayaz
School of Biomedical Engineering
Science and Health Systems
Drexel University
hasan.ayaz@drexel.edu

David Gefen
Lebow College of Business
Drexel University
gefend@drexel.edu

Banu Onaral
School of Biomedical Engineering
Science and Helath Systems
Drexel University
banu.onaral@drexel.edu

Abstract

This review paper introduces the emerging technology of optical brain imaging, also known as functional near
infrared (fNIR) spectroscopy, and discusses its potential role in enhancing theory and methodology used in MIS
research. We discuss basic fNIR principles including the technique’s safe and portable nature, which allows
ambulatory brain activity assessment in real world environments. We then touch on the neural correlates that fNIR
measures, and the cortical oxygenation changes in the dorsal and anterior regions of the prefrontal cortex. We
compare fNIR with traditional neuroimaging methods such as fMRI and PET. We also list case studies, future
directions, and potential approaches relevant to MIS. fNIR may be used to inform theory and improve assessments
in MIS-based studies, including informing theory, by identifying neural correlates, studying constructs that could not
easily if at all be measured with traditional methods, applying objective constructs that subjects are unaware of, and
designing better surveys.

Keywords: Functional Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy, Brodmann Area 9, Brodmann Area 10, Dorsolateral
Prefrontal Cortex, Anterior Prefrontal Cortex.

Dennis Galletta was the accepting Senior Editor.
Gefen, David; Ayaz Hasan; Onaral, Banu (2014) “Apply Functional Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy to Enhance MIS Research,”
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction, (6) 3, pp. 55-73.

Volume 6

■

Issue 3

■

September 2014

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

1. Introduction
The importance of neuroscience and its potential is recognized in management information systems
(MIS) research (e.g., Dimoka et al., 2012; Riedl et al., 2010a). Recent studies utilizing neuroimaging
techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) have provided invaluable insight into
key topics of interest to the MIS community. Dimoka et al. (2012), for example, show that trust and
distrust are distinctly different constructs because each is apparently processed mainly in different brain
regions. Those neural correlates imply that trust is associated with brain regions related to rational
thought, while distrust is associated more with brain regions known to be related to emotional fear
reaction. Likewise, Riedl, Hubert, and Kenning (2010b) provide a neural mechanisms-based explanation
of why men and women are different in their trust processing. In both cases, neuroscience provided
answers that haunted survey-based MIS research for quite some time and could not be convincingly
answered by survey and ethnographic research alone. Studies employing neuroscience are, however, still
quite rare, possibly because of the high cost involved and the extraordinary training needed to conduct
fMRI and PET studies. This paper introduces a more affordable and versatile neuroimaging tool, optical
brain imaging, that, despite its lesser resolution and limited application only to the prefrontal cortex (PFC),
can provide an alternative that more social scientists can apply and that, because of its versatility, can
address research contexts where fMRI would be less applicable.
Adding fNIR into the MIS toolbox is important for several reasons. First, revealing neural mechanisms and
their relation to behavior can enhance our understanding of MIS in general. This could be crucial in
developing theory because already certain brain areas can be associated, even if only on a broad level,
with certain types of emotion and other constructs of interest to social sciences (Dimoka, 2011). fNIR can
also be beneficial in the creation of better IT interfaces and research questionnaires. Second, because
fNIR instrumentation can be portable, wearable, and even battery-operated and wireless (Ayaz et al.,
2013), it provides the ability to measure objective brain-based assessment metrics in natural working
environments. Such environments typically place many restrictions on the subject that make other types
of neuroimaging impractical. These metrics can supplement the behavioral measures and subjective selfreported measures. Technology is already moving toward that direction with other kinds of wearable
imaging.

2. What is fNIR
2.1. An Overview
fNIR is an emerging neuroimaging technique that has recently been added to the neuroscience toolbox.
The ability to monitor the brain in real world settings without or with minimal restrictions to the participants
can shed light on unknown cognitive processes, lead to a better understanding of the brain, and
potentially optimize MIS approaches. fNIR enables such neuroimaging by monitoring the oxy-hemoglobin
and deoxy-hemoglobin concentration changes in the cortical tissue in the brain via a non-invasive,
affordable, and relatively non-limiting manner (Chance, 1991, 1998; Chance, Chuang, UnAh, Alter, &
Lipton, 1993; Hoshi & Tamura, 1997; Villringer & Chance, 1997; Villringer, Planck, Hock, Schleinkofer, &
Dirnagl, 1993). fNIR sensors utilize near-infrared light that is sensitive to the hemoglobin molecule that
carry oxygen that is vital for nerve cells. By tracking the changes of the hemoglobin molecule over time
and at different brain areas, activations of respective areas can be monitored.
Figure 1 (left side) shows a light emitting diode (LED) based incarnation of near-infrared spectroscopy
that was manufactured by a Drexel University start-up and is based on the work of the biomedical optics
pioneer Professor Britton Chance. As the figure shows, this device is relatively small, portable, and field
deployable with minimal limitations on the subject. It is also easy to use and safe. The combination of the
four LEDs and 10 detectors results in 16 measurement locations, known as optodes, that cover the full
forehead of the participant for assessing the anterior prefrontal cortex. Figure 1 (right side) shows these
LEDs and detectors together with the corresponding brain areas in the PFC. The fNIR headset is placed
on the forehead so that the bottom of the device is just above the eyebrows and its middle line is in line
with the nose. This means that the center of the device approximately corresponds to the separation of
the left from the right cortex hemispheres in the PFC. Figure 1 (right side) shows this separation as the
dark area between sensors 9 and 10 on the one side and 7 and 8 on the other. The positioning of fNIR in
this location means that fNIR measures the left and right dorsal and inferior anterior prefrontal cortex
areas (Ayaz et al., 2006; Ayaz et al., 2012; Bunce, Izzetoglu, Izzetoglu, Onaral, & Pourrazaei, 2006;
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

56

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

Izzetoglu, Izzetoglu, Bunce, Onaral, & Pourrezaei, 2005).

Figure 1. The fNIR Sensor (left) and Measurement Locations (right) 12

2.2. The Measures
The biological process fNIR records is the change in levels of oxyhemoglobin (HbO) and
deoxyhemoglobin (HbR) concentrations in the red blood cells as their hemoglobin binds to and releases
oxygen, respectively. Blood oxygenation, specifically oxygen supply in the brain, is tightly regulated, and
slight fluctuations in the blood oxygenation are connected to neural activation of the immediate
surrounding cortical tissue through a well-known paradigm called neurovascular coupling. The increase in
oxygen-rich blood after increased activity is called hemodynamic response. Hemodynamic response is
delayed by at least 2-3 seconds, and up to 6-8 seconds. fNIR tracks these relative changes in brain
activity through changes in the concentration changes of HbR and HbO. fMRI also tracks the
hemodynamic response, through blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signals, but only with one timeseries for each brain region as opposed to four time-series in fNIR. The four time-series measures in fNIR
are oxy-hemoglobin, deoxy-hemoglobin, total-hemoglobin (estimate of blood volume), and oxygenation
(difference in hemoglobin).
The temporal resolution of the fNIR sensor depicted in Figure 1 (left side) is 500 milliseconds, which
means a complete scan of all 16 optodes with 3 channels in each is completed twice a second. Light
absorption is dominated by HbO and HbR in the 700 nm to 900 nm wavelength. The LEDs emit light at
two wavelengths: one above and one below the isosbestic point of HbO and HbR (i.e. where light is
absorbed more or less equally by HbO and by HbR—at 805 nm) (Cope et al., 1988; Jobsis, 1977;
Villringer & Chance, 1997). Hence, one of thewavelengths, 730 nm, is more sensitive to HbR, and the
other wavelength, 850 nm, is more sensitive to HbO. The measurement location is a volumetric area in
the middle of light source and detector. The depth of measurement volume from the surface is a function
of the light source and detector distance. It is approximately half of the distance between the light source
and the detector. The sensor pad shown in Figure 1 (left side) has a 2.5 cm source-detector separation,

1
2

Adapted from Ayaz et al. (2012). Also appears at http://drexel.edu/conquer/research/presentations/
Source http://www.biomed.drexel.edu/fNIR/CONQUER/Optical_Brain_Imaging.html

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

57

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

which forms a tight grid of 2 by 8 covering the forehead.
The LEDs are activated one at a time in sequence. Each time an LED is activated, the four detectors
surrounding it are sampled. The sensors measure the light that is reflected back from the red blood cells
through the scalp and skull. Using reflectance mode near-infrared spectroscopy for cortical tissue
assessment was first reported by Jobsis (1977). The arrangement of the four LEDs and 10 sensors,
shown at the top of Figure 1 (right side), results in the data being collected in 16 channels. For each of
the 16 channels, fNIR shows the level of HbO in red and of HbR in blue. The combined value of the two,
measuring blood volume, is shown in green. A sample of this output is shown in Figure 2 as these levels
change over time for a single subject in a single treatment condition. All the analyses are done for each
subject in each session individually. Typically, a single trial measurement interval can be around 30
seconds long and multiple trial/repetitions with multiple experiment conditions can yield experiment times
anywhere between 5-10 minutes to a couple of hours. fNIR shows the changes in HbO and HbR
compared to the resting time level that is measured prior to the actual experiment (Ayaz et al., 2012).

Figure 2. Sample Output of fNIR by Optodes

2.3. Signal Analysis in Brief
The combined changes in the received light intensities at 730 nm and 850 nm enable absorption
assessment and can be used to calculate the relative changes in HbO and HbR over time by applying a
modified Beer-Lambert law based on a method proposed by Cope et al. (1988). Infrared light is partially
absorbed (due to light absorbing molecules like hemoglobin and water) and scattered (due to
inhomogeneous layered structure) as it travels through the body. The light-absorbing molecules,
chromophores, that interact mainly within the 700-900 nm wavelength range are HbO and HbR (Ayaz et
al., 2012). By comparing the logarithmic ratio of the emitted light and the detected light of these two
wavelengths, considering the absorption level of each in tissue and the distance between the LED and
the sensor, the relative change in the optical density can be calculated. The algorithm for doing this
applying the Beer-Lambert law is detailed in Cope et al. (1988), and its application in fNIR in Ayaz et al.
(2012). Data are passed through a low-pass frequency filter before the Beer-Lambert analysis to filter out
physiological and high frequency noise in signals, such as the signal component related to the cardiac
cycle (changes in blood pressure from one heartbeat to the next) and respiration rate (Izzetoglu et al.,
2005). Other automatic noise reduction algorithms include independent component analysis, principal
component analysis, and optimal filtering (Ayaz, Shewokis, Curtin, Izzetoglu, & Onaral, 2011).
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

58

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

Typically, oxygenation levels are used to assess brain activation due to experimental conditions.
Oxygenation changes are calculated as HbO – HbR. Also, time averaging can be used to get mean
activation in a given time period. The output of this signal processing analysis is a set of 16 data points,
one for each optode, as these change in time for each individual in each treatment. The signals must be
adjusted individually for each subject because of variations in skin color, complexity, perspiration, and so
on. These adjustments involve setting the strength of the LED lights, detector sensitivity, and default
adjustments in the COBI Studio software (Ayaz et al., 2011). These adjustments need to be done prior to
the actual data collection in the experiment for each subject individually. Once the device has been
adjusted to the subject, a baseline measure is taken. This baseline value will be used to test changes in
subsequent cortical hemodynamic response values as the subject is exposed to the treatments in the
experimental design. Setting individual baselines is important because fNIR readings vary substantially
across subjects, as does the biology it measures (Blood, Zatorre, Bermudez, & Evans, 1999).
Current convention in fNIR is to report activity in all of the optodes (Ayaz et al., 2012). Some researchers,
such as Katayose, Nagata, and Kazai (2006), Ayaz et al. (2011), and Moghimi, Kushki, Guerguerian, and
Chau (2012), report an overall average over the entire PFC. Others, such as Matsuda and Hiraki (2006),
report activity averaged out in four regions created by grouping the optodes in to a 2-by-2 set of boxes
representing anterior left, anterior right, posterior left, and posterior right.

2.4. Within-Subject Design
The fNIR data after the filtering and Beer-Lambert analysis can then analyzed in the same way that
survey or archival data are analyzed with regression or analysis of variance methods. Also, other
advanced methods such as linear mixed models have been applied for statistical comparison (Baayen,
Davidson, & Bates, 2008; Langers, Jansen, & Backes, 2007; McKendrick, Ayaz, Olmstead, &
Parasuraman, 2014; Singh & Dan, 2006). The CONQUER CollabOrative group recommends applying
within-subject statistical design analyses because of possible inter-subject variation such as metabolic
differences (Ayaz et al., 2011). For example, Matsuda and Hiraki (2006) report that, among the 13
children they examined, there was high variability in recorded activity in the PFC during video games.
Katayose et al. (2006) also report that not all subjects responded the same. In their case, only four of the
five subjects showed increase in HbO as they heard music.

3. Potential Neural Correlates Identified by fNIR
Understanding the cortical hemodynamic response activity in the regions of the PFC recorded by fNIR
can be advised by previous fMRI research. fNIR records data from the PFC, and specifically regions that
overlap partly with the outer regions of Brodmann Areas 9 and 10. Brodmann Area 9, BA9, is located in
the dorsolateral PFC. Brodmann area 10, BA10, is the anterior prefrontal cortex. BA9 and BA10 are
associated with executive functions such as assessment and short-term memory (Marley, 2011).
Research using fNIR has not discussed at depth what meaning to assign to the left and right regions of
BA9 and BA10. In some cases (e.g., Ayaz et al., 2012), fNIR results were discussed as indictors of overall
cognitive activity in the executive functions of the brain.

3.1. The Right Dorsal Region of the PFC
The dorsolateral PFC has been associated in previous fMRI research to trust created through reciprocal
exchanges in trust games (Baumgartner, Heinrichs, Vonlanthen, Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2008; Delgado,
Frank, & Phelps, 2005; King-Casas et al., 2005; Krueger et al., 2007; McCabe, Houser, Ryan, Smith, &
Trouard, 2001). Related neural correlates associated with this region are suggested by fMRI research by
Pliszka et al. (2006). Pliszka et al. showed that activity in the right dorsal region of the PFC is associated
with conscious inhibition of elective behavior. Pliszka et al. requested subjects while inside an fMRI
machine to press a button when they saw one card, what they called the “go condition”, or to refrain from
doing so if after seeing the first card they were exposed to another card, what they called the “no go
condition”. They reported that the right dorsal region of the PFC was more active in the no go condition. In
other words, it may be that increased activity in this region indicates conscious inhibition of behavior.
Maybe because this region is associated with response suppression, it is also associated with attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Rubia et al., 1999). Perhaps also supporting this association,
Shulman et al. (1997) suggest, based on a review of positron emission tomography (PET) studies, that
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

59

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

reduced activity in this region is associated also with reduced spontaneous thought unrelated to the task
subjects are currently doing. Interestingly, BA9 seems to be related to psychiatric disorders too (for more
details read Marley (2011)).

3.2. The Left Dorsal Region of the PFC, BA9
The left anterior regions of BA9 and BA10 are more active when subjects read a passage and need to
predict how the story they just read will develop (Chow, Kaup, Raabe, & Greenlee, 2008). Also, fMRI
research shows that subjects asked to evaluate whether a picture matches a sentence they had just read
had a more active left superior medial frontal gyrus (partly overlapping the left region of BA9) when that
sentence was idiomatic compared to a literal sentence (Lauro, Tettamanti, Cappa, & Papagno, 2008).
Likewise, Hugdahl et al. (1999) report increased activation in the left middle frontal gyrus (partially
overlapping BA9) when subjects performed a semantic categorization of proposing words that match a
given category, such as U.K. soccer clubs.
Left BA9 is active not only in verbal contexts. The left dorsolateral PFC is also more active when subjects
are involved in multiple relational integration problems. Relational integration problems involve choosing
what figure to add into a 3-by-3 set of figures in which one figure is left out. Multiple relational integration
problems involve matching the missing figure based on the patterns in both the rows and the columns. In
multiple relational integration problems, but apparently not so when choosing a figure to match the pattern
of only the rows or only the columns or just choosing a figure that is the same as all the other 8 figures in
a 3-by-3 block when all the 8 figures are the same, BOLD signals indicated increased activity in the left
dorsolateral PFC and in BA10 (Christoff et al., 2001) 3 . Additionally, when subjects assessed in a
questionnaire how easy it was to use a website, their left dorsolateral PFC was more active (Dimoka et
al., 2011).
The left dorsal region of the PFC, just as the right region, may also be involved in conscious elective
behavioral inhibition, but regarding verbal activity. Elliot, Dolan, & Frith (2000) asked subjects to complete
a sentence by adding the missing word. They reported that the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex was
more active when the subjects were asked to add a word that did not fit the context of the sentence as
compared to when they were asked to complete it with a word that did fit into the overall context of the
sentence. In other words, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex seems to be more active when there is
response suppression (Elliot et al., 2000).

3.3 Anterior Region of the PFC, BA10
The functionality of BA10, the anterior prefrontal cortex, also known as the rostral PFC and the front polar
cortex, is not well understood. It may be involved in moral judgment (Borg, Hynes, Van Horn, Grafton, &
Sinnott-Armstrong, 2006). It also seems to be associated with executive functions related to how to carry
out an activity in many kinds of cognitive tasks including awareness of activities, remembering what to do,
multitasking, consciously concentrating on a task, and conscious switching from one activity to another
(Burgess, Simons, Dumontheil, & Gilbert, 2005). BA10 is the largest region in the frontal lobes (Christoff
et al., 2001) and is about twice as large in humans than in great apes (Semendeferi, Armstrong,
Schleicher, Zilles, & Van Hoesen, 2001). BA10 shows increased BOLD activity—among other things—in
verbal retrieval (Rugg, Fletcher, Frith, Frackowiak, & Dolan, 1996), color memory retrieval (Martin, Haxby,
Lalonde, Wigges, & Ungerleider, 1995), language (Klein, Milner, Zatorre, Meyer, & Evans, 1995), auditory
perception (Kosslyn, Alpert, & Thompson, 1995), prospective memory (Burgess, Scott, & Frith, 2003), and
visual reasoning (Christoff et al., 2001). It would seem that the common thread in many previous studies
of BA10 is that it is involved in episodic memory of many kinds (though not exclusively) (Burgess et al.,
2005).
In a rare lesion study of BA10 of a man in his early 20s whose almost entire rostral PFC was removed
after a car accident, the man showed resulting problems with multitasking but not with memory,
perception, or other executive functions (Metzler & Parkin, 2000). The lack of an apparent effect on
executive functions of a lesion in this area was also apparent in other case studies (e.g., Bird, Castelli,
Malik, Frith, and Husain (2004); Goel and Grafman (2000)). Comparable results were also obtained in a
3

BOLD is blood-oxygen-level-dependent contrast. It is used in fMRI to measure changes in neuron activity based on the increased
paramagnetic properties of deoxygenated hemoglobin compared to oxygenated.

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

60

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

comprehensive experiment involving 60 acute neurological patients, many of whom had brain tumors,
who were matched with equivalent IQ level healthy subjects: learning, planning, and remembering were
not significantly different, but multitasking ability was reduced among those with left rostral lesions
(Burgess, 2000).
BA10 seems to be involves in meta-cognition, too; that is, in self-reflection (Johnson et al., 2002). It may
also be involved in assessing the mental states of other people (Frith & Frith, 2003). BA10 may be
involved in these activities also as a coordinator of activities in other brain regions (Koechlin, Basso,
Pietrini, Panzer, & Grafman, 1999). Another hypothesis, the default hypothesis, is that, because BOLD
activity in this region is decreased when people encounter new or demanding cognitive tasks (Christoff,
Ream, & Gabrieli, 2004), BA10 as a default is active in coordinating and evaluating information but that
resources are drawn away from it when new or complex cognitive tasks need to be performed. An
alternative view proposed by Burgess et al. (2005) is that BA10 may serve as a gateway. It may be
involved in the coordination of information towards solving desired objectives, perhaps with the medial
region directing more attention toward sensory input, and the lateral toward internally created thoughts.
To summarize, BA9 is associated with cognitive effort (Owen, McMillan, Laird, & Bullmore, 2005),
calculation (Ernst & Paulus, 2005), and working memory (Braver et al., 1997); and, overall, BA9 and
BA10 are associated with executive functions of assessment and using short-term memory, including
verbal and non-verbal memory, judgment, problem solving, and sematic memory (Burgess et al., 2005).

3.4. A List of Some Constructs fNIR Neural Correlates can Address
Note that, while fMRI scans the entire brain, fNIR scans only the prefrontal cortex. Accordingly, neural
correlates associated with brain areas other than the prefrontal cortex are outside the scope of fNIR
research. Table 1 summarizes some of the neural correlates available to research through fNIR and their
potentially related constructs and many others that are not. This is only a partial list and intended only to
demonstrate some areas of interest. Some of these additional areas are discussed in Dimoka et al.
(2012) and Riedl et al. (2010a).
Table 1. Some Neural Correlates fNIR Can Study and Their Related MIS Constructs (On Left) and
Neural Correlates of Potential Interest to MIS that Cannot Be Studied with fNIR (On Right)
MIS constructs related to neural correlates accessible
with fNIR
Prefrontal cortex
- Attention
- Task novelty
- Familiarity
- Habit
- Cognitive effort and ease of use
- Moral judgment and justice theory
- Conscious choice and behavior
- Sematic memory retrieval
- Learning
- Multitasking
- Conscious inhibition
- Judgment, such as trustworthiness assessments
- Confusion

MIS constructs related to neural correlates outside
fNIR accessibility
Broca's area, Wernicke's area, and auditory cortex
- Verbal activity including: hearing, talking, listening,
language processing, meaning of words
Premotor cortex
- Planning behavior, including planning to say words
- Learning motor skills
Motor cortex
- Saying words
- Eye motion
Visual cortex and the occipital lobe
- Identifying and Responding to visual cues
Insula
- Pain, empathy, and social emotions
Limbic system and the amygdala
- Emotional Fear
- Distrust
Olfactory bulb
- Identifying and remembering smells and odors

Additionally, fNIR can augment current studies of trust and distrust as done in the context of fMRI (e.g.,
Dimoka, 2010; Riedl et al., 2010b; Riedl & Javor, 2012; Riedl, 2013) where it could serve to study in realAIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

61

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

world settings (e.g., Gefen, Sela, Ayaz, & Izzetoglu, 2012) the evolving and context dependent
relationships among trust, risk, and behavior (Gefen & Pavlou, 2012; Pavlou & Gefen, 2004, 2005). fNIR
could also provide insight on the crucial relationship between familiarity and trust as they occur in real
world settings, as opposed to sitting in the movement and social limiting environment of an fMRI. To date,
studying the relationship between familiarity and trust has been limited to ethnographic, panel, and survey
research (Gefen & Carmel, 2008; Gefen, Wyss, & Lichtenstein, 2008; Gulati, 1995; Palmer, 2005) without
resort to brain imaging.

4. Advantages and Disadvantages of fNIR
The relative advantages of fNIR over fMRI and PET can be summarized as a matter of considerable cost
savings, versatility, portability, ease of deployment, size, and nonintrusiveness. Training to use fNIR is
easier and faster than fMRI and PET. Moreover, it is safer than PET because it does not require
radioactive tracers, and safer than fMRI because it does not expose the subject to strong magnetic
fields 4. All this means that obtaining review board permission for fNIR is typically easier than for fMRI and
PET studies. Most importantly, fNIR is applicable to daily activities in natural settings. A main
disadvantage of fNIR is that measurements are limited to the outer cortex area. fNIR can only measure
areas close to the surface/skin, in contrast to fMRI that can measure all brain areas. Additionally, spatial
resolution is limited (i.e. fMRI has a resolution of millimetres whereas fNIR has a resolution of
centimeters) (Ayaz et al., 2013). All in all, fNIR is not a replacement for other imaging systems, but has its
own advantages and disadvantages that make it useful for a range of applications.

4.1. Lower Cost
Cost is always a factor in neuroscience research, and it can be prohibitive. The Neurocognition
Laboratory at Temple University, for example, estimates the cost of an fMRI experiment at $1000 per
subject 5. New fMRI machines operating at 3 tesla cost in excess of 2 million dollars 6, and even older
second hand 3 tesla models can cost in the range of $600,000-$900,000 7. Add to those numbers that the
suite that houses it costs another $500,000, not including the maintenance and care, all this amounts to
what in many cases could be a prohibitive expense 8. Operating such a machine is also expensive and
requires a team of several technicians to oversee the operation. This puts fMRI research totally out of
range for most behavioral scientists. fNIR, in contrast, while not exactly cheap, cost as low as $30,000 9,
which puts it in the affordable range of business, psychology, and other non-medical schools. fNIR also
does not require expensive dedicated labs and the support of technicians. Once the hardware is
purchased, the cost of administering an experiment is negligible and is measured only in researcher time
and data analysis. To place price and spectroscopy in context, another tool available to MIS research is
electroencephalography (EEG), available for as low as around $650 from Emotiv
http://www.emotiv.com/ 10. A discussion about the suitability of EEG to MIS research is available in Dimoka
et al. (2012).

4.2. Increased Versatilability
While cost is a crucial advantage of fNIR, it would be a mistake to think of fNIR only as a cheap and
downgraded alternative to fMRI. fNIR has the distinct advantage of being versatile. It is portable, easy to
deploy, and small. fNIR consists of no more than a headgear the size of a bandana, a control box the size
of a small laptop, and a laptop computer or PC. All these can easily be deployed anywhere for field
studies in natural settings. There is also a battery operated miniaturized version available (Ayaz et al.,
2013). Moreover, fNIR, in contrast to fMRI, does not require large stationary labs with heavy protective
4

These magnetic fields can add considerable cost and risk to the operating team. See
http://www.med.nyu.edu/cbi/facilities/7tesla.html
5 http://www.temple.edu/tunl/WhatisfMRI.htm
6 http://news.sciencemag.org/sciencenow/2005/12/12-01.html and
http://www.sevencounties.org/poc/view_doc.php?type=doc&id=8947
7 Informed by Zetta Medical Technologies, LLC, 1313 Ensell Road, Lake Zurich, IL 60047, March 2013.
8 http://www.sevencounties.org/poc/view_doc.php?type=doc&id=8947
9 There’s a wide spectrum of price range, some optical brain imaging devices can go as high as $500,000 depending on the
configuration, number of optodes, and hardware options.
10 More heavy duty EEG can cost in the range of $60,000 to $70,000.

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

62

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

shielding to hold very large machinery weighing in the tens of tons and emitting strong radiation that make
current fMRI machines only suitable to stationary dedicated labs. fNIR also does not limit data collection
only to subjects who must lie down in a noisy MRI tube. This is a theoretically important issue as noise is
a potential distracting experimental artefact.
Noise in itself can affect behavior and perception, such as performance among children with ADHD
(Abikoff, Courtney, Szeibel, & Koplewicz, 1996) and solving math problems also among people who do
not suffer from ADHD (Usher & Feingold, 2000).
fNIR also allows data collections while subjects move about naturally—a significant advantage over fMRI
where subjects are instructed to lie motionless. Moreover, conceivably, lying down in a motion-restricted
environment could also in itself affect behavior, perceptions, and emotions, and not all subjects feel
comfortable being exposed to such an environment. fNIR, because it only involves a small headgear,
avoids introducing such artefacts into the experimental design. fNIR is also less intrusive than fMRI and
PET by far. The headgear of fNIR is mostly not noticeable by the subjects after a few seconds of wearing
it.
Consequently, when neuroimaging needs to be done in natural settings, or anywhere else outside a fMRI
tube and not requiring the injection of radioactive isotopes as in PET, there is no other current alternative
to fNIR for measuring cortical hemodynamic response. If social science research wants to apply
neuroimaging to study human behavior and thought in natural settings such as offices, meeting and
training sessions, or even in online settings where people sit in front of a computer screen, then optical
brain imaging such as fNIR poses the least constraints on the study design. Moreover, fNIR studies can
be conducted by one person: the experimenter. In contrast, PET and fMRI require the attendance of
several skilled and certified technicians apart from the researcher. Additionally, fNIR only requires that the
subject have an exposed and clean forehead onto which the headgear can be attached. This is a minimal
requirement compared to PET and fMRI that pose potential danger to subjects and are therefore limited in
their usage and time of exposure. Moreover, all fNIR does is to expose the subjects to near infrared light
in ambient wavelengths and intensity to which they are already exposed daily from the sun. In contrast to
fMRI, fNIR can be applied to subjects who are pregnant, to infants, and to those who have artificial
implants/limbs or pacemakers. Importantly, many typical subjects are not required to remove their glasses
when wearing optical brain imaging headgear.

4.3. Faster Training
Social scientists looking into adding optical brain imaging to their research can expect to be training ready
in hours with fNIR. This is orders of magnitude shorter than fMRI. Administering PET is mostly out of the
question because it requires medical training that social scientists do not typically have. As social
scientists seldom collaborate with medical labs, it puts tools such as PET out of range.

4.4. Disadvantages and Limitations
The main disadvantage of optical brain imaging is that its penetration and resolution are limited to
studying only broad areas in the PFC. fNIR has a resolution in the range of 2-3 cm2, and the system we
describe in Section 2 can only measure the PFC, not other cortical areas due to hair interference. fMRI, in
contrast, has a resolution of 2-3 mm3, and, in more recent studies, even 1 mm3, and can record BOLD
activity anywhere in the brain. These are critical limitations of fNIR, which make it an alternative only for
some types of PFC research. fNIR is also only suited for the study of neural correlates as they apply to
brain regions 2-3 cm2 wide. Put into perspective, however, the relatively low resolution problem of fNIR is
of lesser concern considering social science research discusses neural correlates as they apply to entire
brain regions such as the entire amygdala, insula, and PFC (e.g., Dimoka, 2010), rather than the
subdivisions in those regions. This does not mean that comparing subdivisions in those regions is not
important, such as comparing the central subdivision of the amygdala with its medial subsection (Yalch &
Spangenberg, 2000). Lastly, optical brain imaging, as is the case with fMRI, records neural activity.
Setting the statistical thresholds for false positive and false negatives is crucial, as in any statistical
analysis comparing means. Optical brain imaging, or indeed any other data collection method, should not

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

63

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

be treated as a false-proof black box 11.

5. Wearable Optical Brain Imaging Informing MIS Research
Optical brain imaging allows researchers to identify changes in brain activity through cortical
hemodynamic response signals. This is true of other methods of neuroimaging too, such as fMRI, but the
affordability, versatilability, and non-intrusiveness of fNIR place it in an arguably unique position to inform
MIS. This section discusses some of those aspects with examples. While many of these suggestions can
apply to other neuroimaging technologies, their application with fNIR has the unique advantage that it can
be applied without introducing intrusive experimental artifacts such as lying in a solitary manner in a
confined tube with limited movement as is the case with fMRI. Moreover, fNIR allows the application of
these suggestions even when measuring activity done in teams in almost natural settings.

5.1. Informing Theory by Identifying Neural Correlates
fNIR can inform MIS, as do other optical brain imaging methods, by identifying neural correlates of
behaviors, emotions, perceptions, and other important constructs. In other words, optical brain imaging
can show association between changes in behaviors, emotions, perceptions, and other constructs on the
one hand, and changes in cortical hemodynamic response activity in various brain regions on the other.
Knowing from previous research to some extent what those brain regions do can result in new insight into
research questions of interest. This has been applied already with fMRI to identify the neural correlates of
trust and distrust, and thus to show how the two are distinctly different with trust being centered in regions
such as the PFC and the insula, which suggests cooperation, while distrust in the amygdala, which
suggests fear (Dimoka, 2010). Likewise, neural correlates may provide new insight on why men and
women differ in their trusting behavior (Riedl et al., 2010b). Data collected through surveys, observations,
and other methods used by social scientists do not provide such a peek into changes in brain activity.
Neural correlates may also advise on the development of new theory by showing how social phenomena
are related to otherwise immeasurable brain activity. This allowed Dimoka (2010), for example, to suggest
that distrust was not the opposite of trust but a totally unrelated construct dealing with fear, which has
been suggested in the past (McKnight, Kacmar, & Choudhury, 2004) but never convincingly shown
because survey data alone cannot show this beyond doubt.
Moreover, in many realms of social sciences, such as in MIS, researchers often expect a rational theory
base connecting cause and effect. To a large extent, this may be based on the enormous impact the
theory of reasoned action (Ajzen, 1985) and the technology acceptance model (Davis, 1989) have had.
But, people do not always behave rationally, certainly not when it concerns trust theory (Blau, 1964).
Connecting cause and effect through an irrational theoretical basis, or a basis that currently lacks a
rational explanation, is not easy. Even significant correlations may seem to sceptical reviewers as
superfluous, random correlations. Making the case for such a connection when there is no theory base
could be made easier if a clear neural correlate exists. If the biology is there, then the relationship exists
whether or not there is a current rational social science theory explaining it. A prime example of this as it
relates to fMRI is that women adopt IT differently than men do. This has been shown empirically (e.g.,
Venkatesh & Morris, 2000; Gefen & Straub, 1997) and may be related to socio-linguistics (Tannen, 1995),
but, without biological evidence, many reviewers are still reluctant to accept it. Fortunately, thanks to
neural correlates, the biology is there to support this hypothesis and not only with survey data. As Riedl et
al. (2010b) showed with fMRI, men in an eBay context show increased activity in the dorsal anterior
cingulate and BA10 in the PFC, while women show increased activity in the insula cortex and caudate
nucleus. These neural correlate may possibly indirectly support the hypothesis that women invest more in
understanding other people.
The previous MIS fMRI research cited above resulted in important insights to theory thanks to fMRI’s
ability to identify neural correlates. Not all MIS research, however, can be conducted in the limiting
context of an fMRI with the many repeated measurements it needs to ensure a reliable signal reading.
That is where fNIR comes in. fNIR can identify neural correlates by restricting the subjects only to the
11

Setting the thresholds wrongly in fMRI with very small samples can result in nonsensical results such as showing that a dead salmon
has
BOLD
activity
indicating
it
is
responding
to
picture
of
people
in
social
settings:
http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2009/09/fmrisalmon/

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

64

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

extent that they need to wear a headband, which thus allow them to engage in regular, complex activities.
This could allow MIS researchers to study complex activities such as how people interact in an online
marketplace (e.g., Gefen & Carmel, 2012), what IT and IT-enabled cues they subconsciously pay more
attention to in an human computer interface (HCI), and what in the IT interface may moderate their
attention. All these could add new perspectives to the much applied theory of reasoned action (Ajzen,
1985) and its technology acceptance model (Davis, 1989) derivative. Moreover, not all researchers have
access to fMRI, can afford to use it, or are licensed to do so.

5.2. Studying New Kinds of Constructs to Inform Theory
Optical brain imaging can also allow researchers to study a host of new constructs that cannot easily or
convincingly be studied with other methods and methodologies. Ayaz et al. (2012), for example, studied
cognitive workload among air traffic controllers with fNIR spectroscopy of the PFC, and Ayaz et al. (2011),
also using fNIR spectroscopy, showed a pattern of decreased PFC activity with learning. Neither of these
constructs (cognitive workload and cognitive learning) can be convincingly studied with traditional social
science methods. And yet, adding such constructs could inform theory in many new ways. This, too,
demonstrates the unique advantages that fNIR has over other kinds of neuroimaging. Air traffic controllers
can be expected to function normally while directing aircraft if all the experiment requires of them is
wearing a headband. It would be rather impossible to do so while confined individually and motionless in
an fMRI machine.

5.2.1. Examples Relating to Trust Theory
Cognitive workload and learning may clarify, for example, how habit combines with perceived usefulness
to predict IT usage. Results may possibly show a reduction in cognitive effort with experience. Such a
result might imply a shift from assessing perceived usefulness towards using IT out of habit without any
special additional thought. Being able to measure cognitive effort directly could also empirically support
the crucial theoretical basis in trust theory of why people need to trust at all. Luhmann (1979) suggest that
people trust because trust allows people to set aside concerns about others’ possible behavior, and, in
doing so, to simplify the overwhelmingly complex social world to cognitively manageable levels. This
hypothesis is widely accepted, as is the hypothesis that trust is built through feedback and experience
(Mayer, Davis, & Schoorman, 1995; Zucker, 1986), but it is hard to test reduced cognitive complexity or
learning as a real-time cognitive process with current social science methods. Optical brain imaging such
as fNIR could be used to test these hypotheses. fNIR could be used to show that when people refrain
from action all together with strangers that there is little change in their PFC cortical hemodynamic
response activity. That may imply that people are overwhelmed into inaction in such cases, indirectly
supporting Luhmann’s social complexity reduction hypothesis. Optical brain imaging could also be applied
to show the measurable neural correlates of cognitive learning. Applying optical brain imaging in this
manner could show high levels of PFC cortical hemodynamic response activity when people first
encounter strangers, implying that people invest more cognitive effort into studying whether strangers are
trustworthy. Again, fNIR has a unique advantage over other optical brain imaging techniques in that all it
requires of subjects is to wear a headband.

5.2.2. Examples Relating to Human Computer Interface Design
Taking Ayaz et al.’s (2013) observations about cognitive workload and neuroergonomics to the realm of
designing HCI could help improve these designs through objective complexity measures. HCI could be
evaluated as having a better design when using it involves less cognitive effort. Applying this kind of fNIR
construct could also provide a better theoretical basis for why perceived ease of use is so important in IT
design and why it affects perceived usefulness and use intentions (Davis, 1989). Currently, this is
explained as an exemplar of the theory of reasoned action (Ajzen, 1985) and its derivatives, but there
may be a cognitive complexity aspect to it, too. This kind of investigation would be especially beneficial
considering that, at least in some contexts of eBay-type activity, there are several different brain regions
involved in assessing ease of use and usefulness (Dimoka et al., 2011). fNIR could reveal at least some
PFC neural correlates in more natural and diverse settings, and hence allow for better HCI design and a
better understanding of the process of reducing HCI’s cognitive complexity.
There are many constructs that could have become central to MIS but have been ignored because of the
limitations imposed by traditional research methods. Among the new types of constructs that could be
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

65

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

studied are paying and losing attention and being distracted by features in the HCI. Oxygenation changes
and hemodynamic responses as revealed through fNIR could provide an objective, even if indirect,
measure of neural correlates, and through them perhaps suggest possible mental processes. Likewise,
fNIR could identify what draws subjects’ attention. In the case of HCI, this could include identifying the
optimal location, shape, color, picture, and other attributes of a control, such as a button or picture. fNIR
could also be used to gauge the ease of use of new interface designs by measuring PFC activity levels as
people navigate through computer interfaces. Currently, this is done through subjective assessments.
fNIR creates the possibility of making these assessments objective and adjustable in real-time to account
for individual preferences and visual challenges. Moreover, blood volume, also measured objectively by
fNIR, could indicate tension and arousal created by HCI aspects. These constructs cannot be easily
measured with current methodologies, nor can the HCI design be adjusted immediately to a user’s
cognitive effort.

5.2.3. Objectively Measuring Constructs Subjects Are Not Aware of
Optical brain imaging such as fNIR can also be used to objectively measure the effects of events that
subjects are not, or just barely, even aware of. Already, fMRI can be used as a lie detector (Harris, 2010).
In more mundane circumstances, this may occur in an experiment where subjects are exposed to
environmental changes, such as in an experiment that subtly changes the luminosity level of the
computer screen. Understanding the nomological context of such effects is very hard with traditional
social science research methods because the subjects are at most only barely aware of what is occurring.
Recording neural correlates could provide one way of studying this, and, in doing so, provide theoretical
insight. This could be true of any neuroimaging method, but is even more applicable in the case of optical
brain imaging providing it is the executive function that is being studied (i.e., that it measures the PFC).
Additionally, it is often hard to obtain truthful answers in even anonymous questionnaires about sensitive
topics because subjects self-censor their own answers so their answers are socially acceptable (Cook &
Campbell, 1979). This is not a matter than can be easily overcome by research design because subjects
may not even be aware that they are censoring themselves (Cook & Campbell, 1979). One example is
initial trust. Initial trust is the product of many things, including whether the trusting party thinks the other
party is form the same racial or social group (Zucker, 1986). Showing that this kind of initial trust is the
consequence of racial, sexist, or any other kind of socially unaccepted bias may be harder to study
because subjects may consciously lie, or even unconsciously reframe their thoughts so as not to be seen
or perceived, even by themselves, as being unacceptably racist or sexist. Optical brain imaging could
provide a way to measure this by showing that there is less cognitive effort, as recorded through neural
correlates, in the PFC, and therefore presumably less reassessing when the trusted person is from the
same racial or other social group as the trusting party.

5.2.4. Designing Better Surveys
A key concern in designing questionnaires is avoiding a case where questions may be phrased in a
manner that will make the subjects realize, or think they realize, what the researcher is looking for, or just
make the questions seem repetitive and so induce the subjects to answer accordingly in a manner that
makes them seem internally consistent (Cook & Campbell, 1979). A common theme in these concerns is
that the subjects invest extra time and thought to guess what is lying behind the question, and this
possibly biases the answer. There is no rigorous objective way to measure these biases through
statistics, only some indirect tell-tale effects that could be related to many other problems such as
common method bias or low statistical reliability. Optical brain imaging, and in particular fNIR, because it
measures actual changes in relative brain activity in the executive functions, may be able to provide some
level of objective measure of this. Indeed, Ayaz et al. (2012) used such a technique with fNIR to study
mental workload in training. By extension, mental overload should be evident and recorded by fNIR also
when subjects think more extensively as they address a specific questionnaire item while considering
how they answered previous items or what the researchers may be looking for in that item. Adding
automatic markers to mark the beginning and ending of events in the process the subjects go through
could allow for measuring PFC activity for each item. Moreover, such a mechanism could allow for
measuring how these activities change over time for each item and over time as the subject progresses
through the survey. This kind of fNIR application could also possibly identify when questionnaire items are
too long or too boring, presumably by showing that subjects spend less time on those items than on
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

66

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

equivalent length items.
Along the same lines, such a mechanism of tracking PFC activity while subjects are completing a
questionnaire could provide questionnaire designers with indications on the cognitive complexity of their
questionnaire items. Currently, problematic questionnaire items can be identified by asking people in a
pilot run to read and reflect about the items and indicate if any are misleading or otherwise problematic.
This can also be done in a pretest by asking a small group of subjects to reflect on the items after
completing the questionnaire (Cook & Campbell, 1979). These methods are good (Miles & Huberman,
1994), but they are subjective and subject to after-the-effect memory distortions. Problematic
questionnaire items can also be identified indirectly through statistics with methods such as in a
confirmatory factor analysis (Bollen, 1989). However, unwarranted or unexpected overlapping of variance
can mean many things, not only that an item is misworded or requires longer and harder thinking to
comprehend. With fNIR recordings of enhanced PFC activity, optical brain imaging can, in contrast,
provide real-time objective indicators. PFC activity could indicate which questionnaire items are
ambiguous or at least unclear to the extent that subjects need to reflect harder.

6. Conclusion
Wearable optical brain imaging has the potential to revolutionize some aspects of MIS research by
opening new avenues of research into the neural correlates of behavior, cognition, perception, and
emotions. It may also serve to improve current methodologies. This type of neuroimaging has lesser
spatial resolution and penetration than fMRI, but it has unique advantages in that it is affordable, versatile,
and non-intrusive. These advantages make it uniquely appropriate for studying the PFC in natural settings
and without introducing considerable experimental artefacts.

Acknowledgements
The authors wishes to thank the CONQUER CollabOrative group at Drexel University School of
Biomedical Engineering, Science, and Health Systems for their support and invaluable advise.

Disclosure
fNIR Devices LLC manufactures the optical brain imaging instrument and licensed IP and know-how from
Drexel University. H. Ayaz, K. Izzetoglu, and B. Onaral were involved in the technology development and
thus offered a minor share in the new startup firm fNIR Devices LLC.

References
Abikoff, H., Courtney, M. E., Szeibel, P. J., & Koplewicz, H. S. (1996). The effects of auditory stimulation
on the arithmetic performance of children with ADHD and nondisabled children. Journal of
Learning Disabilities, 29(3), 238-246.
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. Beckmann
(Eds.), Action control: From cognition to behavior (pp. 11-39). New York: Springer Verlag.
Ayaz, H., Izzetoglu, M., Platek, S. M., Bunce, S., Izzetoglu, K., Pourrezaei, K., & Onaral, B. (2006).
Registering fNIR data to brain surface image using MRI templates. Proceedings of the 8th IEEE
EMBS Annual International Conference, New York, 2671-2674.
Ayaz, H., Onaral, B., Izzetoglu, K., Shewokis, P. A., McKendrick, R., & Parasuraman, R. (2013).
Continuous monitoring of brain dynamics with functional near infrared spectroscopy as a tool for
neuroergonomic research: Empirical examples and a technological development. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 7, 1-13.
Ayaz, H., Shewokis, P. A., Bunce, S., Izzetoglu, K., Willems, B., & Onaral, B. (2012). Optical brain
monitoring for operator training and mental workload assessment. Neuroimage, 59(1), 36-47.
Ayaz, H., Shewokis, P. A., Curtin, A., Izzetoglu, M., & Onaral, B. (2011). Using MazeSuite and functional
near infrared spectroscopy to study learning in spatial navigation. Journal of Visualized
Experiments, 56, e3443.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random
effects for subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390-412.
Baumgartner, T., Heinrichs, M., Vonlanthen, A., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2008). Oxytocin shapes the
neural circuitry of trust and trust adaptation in humans. Neuron, 58(4), 639-650.
Bird, C.M., Castelli, F., Malik, O., Frith, U., & Husain, M. (2004). The impact of extensive medial frontal
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

67

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

lobe damage on “theory of mind” and cognition. Brain, 127, 914-928.
Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York: Wiley.
Blood, A. J., Zatorre, R. J., Bermudez, P., & Evans, A. C. (1999). Emotional responses to pleasant and
unpleasant music correlate with activity in paralimbic brain regions. Nature Neuroscience, 2(4),
382-387.
Bollen, K. A. (1989). Structural equations with latent variables. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Borg, J.S., Hynes, C., Van Horn, J., Grafton, S., & Sinnott-Armstrong, W. (2006). Consequences, Action,
and Intention as Factors in Moral Judgments: An fMRI Investigation. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 18(5), 803-817.
Braver, T. S., Cohen, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Jonides, J., Smith, E. E., & Noll, D. C. (1997). A parametric
study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory. NeuroImage, 5(1), 49-62.
Bunce, S. C., Izzetoglu, M., Izzetoglu, K., Onaral, B., & Pourrezaei, K (2006). Functional nearinfrared
spectroscopy: An emerging neuroimaging modality. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Magazine, 25(4), 54–62.
Burgess, P. W., Scott, S. K., & Frith, C. D. (2003). The role of the rostral frontal cortex (area 10) in
prospective memory: A lateral versus medial dissociation. Neuropsychologia, 41(8), 906-918.
Burgess, P. W., Simons, J. S., Dumontheil, I., & Gilbert, S. J. (2005). The gateway hypothesis of rostral
prefrontal cortex (area 10) function. In J. Duncan, L. Phillips, & P. McLeod (Eds.), Measuring the
mind: Speed, control, and age (pp. 217-248). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chance, B. (1991). Optical method. Annual Review of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, 20(1), 1-30.
Chance, B. (1998). Near-infrared images using continuous, phase-modulated, and pulsed light with
quantitation of blood and blood oxygenation. Annals of New York Academy of Sciences, 838, 2945.
Chance, B., Zhuang, Z., UnAh, C., Alter, C., & Lipton, L. (1993). Cognition-activated low-frequency
modulation of light absorption in human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 90(8), 3770-3774.
Christoff, K., Prabhakaran, V., Dorfman, J., Zhao, Z., Kroger, J.K., Holyoak, K.J., & Gabrieli, John D. E.
(2001). Rostrolateral prefrontal cortex involvement in relational integration during reasoning.
Neuroimage, 14, 1136-1149.
Christoff, K., Ream, J.M., & Gabrieli, J.D.E. (2004). Neural basis of spontaneous thought processes.
Cortex, 40, 1-9.
Chow, H. M., Kaup, B., Raabe, M., & Greenlee, M. W. (2008). Evidence of fronto-temporal interactions for
strategic inference processes during language comprehension. Neuroimage, 40(2), 940-954.
Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (1979). Quasi experimentation: Design and analytical issues for field
settings. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Cope, M., Delpy, D. T., Reynolds, E. O., Wray, S., Wyatt, J., & van der Zee, P. (1988a). Methods of
quantitating cerebral near infrared spectroscopy data. Advances in Experimental Medicine and
Biology, 222, 183-189.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and user acceptance of information
technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-340.
Delgado, M. R., Frank, R. H., & Phelps, E. A. (2005). Perceptions of moral character modulate the neural
systems of reward during the trust game. Nature Neuroscience, 8(11), 1611-1618.
Dimoka, A. (2010). What does the brain tell us about trust and distrust? Evidence from a functional
neuroimaging study. MIS Quarterly, 34(2), 373-396.
Dimoka, A. (2011). Brain mapping of psychological processes with psychometric scales: An fMRI method
for social neuroscience. Neuroimage, 54, S263-71.
Dimoka, A., Banker, R. D., Benbasat, I., Davis, F. D., Dennis, A. R., Gefen, D., Gupta, A., Ischebeck, A.,
Kenning, P., Müller-Putz, G., Pavlou, P. A., Riedl, R., vom Brocke, J., & Weber, B. (2012). On the
use of neurophysiological tools in IS research: Developing a research agenda for neuroIS. MIS
Quarterly, 36(3), 679-702.
Elliot, R., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2000). Dissociable functions in the medial and lateral orbitfrontal
cortex: Evidence from human neuroimaging studies. Cerebral Cortex, 10(3), 308-317.
Ernst, M., & Paulus, M.P. (2005). Neurobiology of decision making: A selective review from a
neurocognitive and clinical perspective. Biological Psychiatry, 58, 597-604.
Frith, U., & Frith, C.D. (2003). Development and neurophysiology of mentalizing. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 358(1431), 459–473.(1431), 459-473.
Gefen, D., & Carmel, E. (2008). Is the world really flat? A look at offshoring in an online programming
marketplace. MIS Quarterly, 32(2), 367-384.
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

68

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

Gefen, D., & Carmel, E. (2012). Why the first provider takes it all: The consequences of a low trust culture
on pricing and ratings in online sourcing markets. European Journal of Information Systems,
22(6), 604–618.
Gefen, D., & Pavlou, P. A. (2012). The boundaries of trust and risk: The quadratic moderating role of
institutional structures. Information Systems Research, 23(3), 940-959.
Gefen, D., Sela, I., Ayaz, H., & Izzetoglu, K. (2012). Music and inducing trust as monitored via functional
near infrared spectroscopy. Paper presented at the Gmunden Retreat on NeuroIS, Gmunden,
Austria, 2012.
Gefen, D., & Straub, D. W. (1997). Gender differences in the perception and adoption of e-mail: An
extension to the technology acceptance model. MIS Quarterly, 21(4), 389-400.
Gefen, D., Wyss, S., & Lichtenstein, Y. (2008). Business familiarity as risk mitigation in software
development outsourcing contracts. MIS Quarterly, 32(3), 531-551.
Goel, V., & Grafman, J. (2000). The role of the right prefrontal cortex in ill-structured problem solving.
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 17(5), 415-436.
Gulati, R. (1995). Does familiarity breed trust? The implications of repeated ties for contractual choice in
alliances. Academy of Management Journal, 38(1), 85-112.
Harris, M. (2010). MRI lie detectors. IEEE Spectrum. Retrieved from
http://spectrum.ieee.org/biomedical/imaging/mri-lie-detectors
Hoshi, Y., & Tamura, M. (1997). Near-infrared optical detection of sequential brain activation in the
prefrontal cortex during mental tasks. Neuroimage, 5(4), 292-297.
Hugdahl, K., Lundervold, A., Ersland, L., Smievoll, A. I., Sundberg, H., Barndon, R., & Roscher, B. E.
(1999). Left frontal activation during a semantic categorization task: An fMRI-study. The
International Journal of Neuroscience, 99(1-4), 49-58.
Izzetoglu, M., Izzetoglu, K., Bunce, S., Onaral, B., & Pourrezaei, K. (2005). Functional near-infrared
neuroimaging. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 13(2), 153–
159.
Jobsis, F. F. (1977). Noninvasive, infrared monitoring of cerebral and myocardial oxygen sufficiency and
circulatory parameters. Science, 198(4323), 1264-1267.
Johnson, S. C., Baxter, L. C., Wilder, L. S., Pipe, J. G., Heiserman, J. E., & Prigatano, G. P. (2002).
Neural correlates of self-reflection. Brain, 125, 1808-1814.
Katayose, H., Nagata, N., & Kazai, K. (2006). Investigation of brain activation while listening to and
playing music using fNIRS. Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Music Perception
and Cognition, University of Bologna, 107-114.
King-Casas, B., Tomlin, D., Anen, C., Camerer, C. F., Quartz S. R., & Montague P. R. (2005). Getting to
know you: Reputation and trust in a two-person economic exchange. Science, 308(5718), 78–83.
Klein, D., Milner, B., Zatorre, R.J., Meyer, E., & Evans, A.C. (1995). The neural substrates underlying
word generation: A bilingual functional-imaging study. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 92, 2899-2903.
Koechlin, E., Basso, G., Pietrini, P., Panzer, S., & Grafman, J. (1999). The role of the anterior prefrontal
cortex in human cognition. Nature, 399(6732), 148-151.
Kosslyn, S.M., Alpert, N.M., & Thompson, W.L. (1995). Identifying objects at different levels of hierarchy:
A positron emission tomography study. Human Brain Mapping, 3, 107-132.
Krueger, F., McCabe, K., Moll, J., Kriegeskorte, N., Zahn, R., Strenziok, M., Heinecke, A., & Grafman, J.
(2007). The neural correlates of trust. Proceedings of the National Academy Science of USA,
104(50), 20084-20089.
Langers, D., Jansen, J., & Backes, W. (2007).Enhanced signal detection in neuroimaging by means of
regional control of the global false discovery rate. Neuroimage, 38(1), 43-56.
Lauro, L. J., Tettamanti, M., Cappa, S. F., & Papagno, C. (2008). Idiom comprehension: A prefrontal
task? Cereb Cortex, 18(1), 162-170.
Luhmann, N. (1979). Trust and power. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons.
Marley, J. (2011). The amazing world of psychiatry: A psychiatry blog. In Medical Article Review,
Psychiatry.
Martin, A., Haxby, J. V., Lalonde, F. M., Wigges, C. L., & Ungerleider, L. G. (1995). Discrete cortical
regions associated with knowledge of color and knowledge of action. Science, 270, 102-105.
Matsuda, G., & Hiraki, K. (2006). Sustained decrease in oxygenated hemoglobin during video games in
the dorsal prefrontal cortex: A NIRS study of children. NeuroImage, 29(3), 706-711.
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H., & Schoorman, F. D. (1995). An integrative model of organizational trust.
Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 709-734.
AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

69

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

McCabe, K., Houser, D., Ryan, L., Smith, V., & Trouard, T. (2001). A functional imaging study of
cooperation in two-person reciprocal exchange. Proceedings of the National Academy Science of
the United States of America, 98(2), 11832–11835.
McKendrick, R., Ayaz, H., Olmstead, R., & Parasuraman, R. (2014). Enhancing dual-task performance
with verbal and spatial working memory training: Continuous monitoring of cerebral
hemodynamics with NIRS. Neuroimage, 85(3), 1014-1026.
McKnight, D. H., Kacmar, C. J., & Choudhury, V. (2004). Dispositional trust and distrust distinctions in
predicting high- and low-risk internet expert advice site perceptions. e-Service Journal, 3(2), 3558.
Metzler, C., & Parkin, A. J. (2000). Reversed negative priming following frontal lobe lesions.
Neuropsychologia, 38, 363-379.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Moghimi, S., Kushki, A., Guerguerian, A. M., & Chau, T. (2012). Characterizing emotional response to
music in the prefrontal cortex using near infrared spectroscopy. Neuroscience Letters, 525, 7-11.
Owen, A.M., McMillan, K.M., Laird, A.R., & Bullmore, E. (2005). N-back working memory paradigm: A
meta-analysis of normative functional neuroimaging studies. Human Brain Mapping, 25, 46-59.
Palmer, C. T. (2005). Mummers and moshers: Two rituals of trust in changing social environments.
Ethnology, 44(2), 147-166.
Pavlou, P. A., & Gefen, D. (2004). Building effective online marketplaces with institution-based trust.
Information Systems Research, 15(1), 37-59.
Pavlou, P. A., & Gefen, D. (2005). Psychological contract violation in online marketplaces: Antecedents,
consequences, and moderating role. Information Systems Research, 16(4), 372-399.
Pliszka, S. R., Glahn, D. C., Semrud-Clikeman, M., Franklin, C., Perez, R., III., Xiong, J., & Liotti, M.
(2006). Neuroimaging of inhibitory control areas in children with attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder who were treatment naive or in long-term treatment. The American Journal of Psychiatry,
163(6), 1052-1060.
Riedl, R. (2013). On the biology of technostress: Literature review and research agenda. The DATA
BASE for Advances in Information Systems, 44(1), 18-55.
Riedl, R., Banker, R. D., Benbasat, I., Davis, F. D., Dennis, A. R., Dimoka, A., Gefen, D., Gupta, A.,
Ischebeck, P., Kenning, G., Muller-Putz, P., Pavlou, D. W., Straub, D. W., vom Brocke, J., &
Weber, B. (2010a). On the foundations of neuroIS: Reflections on the Gmunden Retreat 2009.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 27(15), 243-264.
Riedl, R., Hubert, M., & Kenning, P. (2010b). Are there neural gender differences in online trust? An fMRI
study on the trustworthiness of eBay offers. MIS Quarterly, 34(2), 397-428.
Riedl, R., & Javor, A. (2012). The biology of trust: Integrating evidence from genetics, endocrinology, and
functional brain imaging. Journal of Neuroscience, Psychology, and Economics, 5(2), 63-91.
Rubia, K., Overmeyer, S., Taylor, E., Brammer, M., Williams, S. C. R., Simmons, A., & Bullmore, E. T.
(1999). Hypofrontality in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder during higher-order motor control:
A study with functional MRI. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 891-896.
Rugg, M. D., Fletcher, P. C., Frith, C. D., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Dolan, R. J. (1996). Differential
activation of the prefrontal cortex in successful and unsuccessful memory retrieval. Brain, 119,
2073-2084.
Semendeferi, K., Armstrong, E., Schleicher, A., Zilles, K., & Van Hoesen, G. W. (2001). Prefrontal cortex
in humans and apes: A comparative study of area 10. American Journal of Physical
Anthropology, 114, 224-241.
Singh, A. K., & Dan, I. (2006). Exploring the false discovery rate in multichannel NIRS. Neuroimage,
33(2), 542-549.
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, F. M., Raichle, M. E., & Petersen, S. E.
(1997). Common blood flow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases in cerebral cortex.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(5), 648-663.
Tannen, D. (1995). The power of talk: Who gets heard and why. Harvard Business Review, 73(5), 138148.
Usher, M., & Feingold, M. (2000). Stochastic resonance in the speed of memory retrieval. Biological
Cybernetics, 83(6), L11–L16.
Venkatesh, V., & Morris, G. M. (2000). Why don't men ever stop to ask for directions? Gender, social
influence, and their role in technology acceptance and usage behavior. MIS Quarterly, 24(1), 115139.

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

70

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

Villringer, A., & Chance, B. (1997). Non-invasive optical spectroscopy and imaging of human brain
function. Trends Neuroscience, 20(10), 435-442.
Villringer, A., Planck, J., Hock, C., Schleinkofer, L., & Dirnagl, U. (1993). Near infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS): A new tool to study hemodynamic changes during activation of brain function in human
adults. Neurosci Lett, 154(1-2), 101-104.
Yalch, R. F., & Spangenberg, E. R. (2000). The effects of music in a retail setting on real and perceived
shopping times. Journal of Business Research, 49(2), 139–147.
Zucker, L. G. (1986). Production of trust: Institutional sources of economic structure, 1840-1920. In B. M.
Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 8, pp. 53-111).
Greenwich, CN: JAI Press.

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

71

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

About The Authors
David GEFEN is a Professor of MIS at Drexel University, Philadelphia USA,
where he teaches IS Outsourcing, Strategic Management of Information
Systems, Database Analysis and Design, VB.NET programming, and research
methodologies. He received his PhD in CIS from Georgia State University and
a M.Sc. in MIS from Tel-Aviv University. His research focuses on information
systems implementation as well as informatics analyses of transactional data
as these apply to the psychological and rational processes involved in the
management of many types of information systems. Before becoming an
academic, was a chief programmer and systems analyst, and then senior manager of a large
logistics information system. David is currently a senior editor in MISQ, the leading academic journal
in the Management Information Systems discipline, as was previously a senior editor with JMIS and
DATABASE.
Hasan AYAZ received his BSc. in Electrical and Electronics Engineering from
Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, with high honors and PhD in Biomedical
Engineering from Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA, USA in 2010. He is
currently an Assistant Research Professor at the School of Biomedical
Engineering, Science and Health Systems at Drexel University where he has
developed enabling software for functional Near Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIR)
based brain monitoring instruments. This technology was licensed by fNIR
Devices LLC and Biopac Systems, Inc. As an extension, he worked on a
portable-handheld medical device, InfraScanner, which utilizes NIR to detect
hematoma in head trauma patients. InfraScanner related awards include DMD (Design of Medical
Devices) Conference 2011 top presenter and EID (Excellence in Design) Gold Award. Dr. Ayaz’s
research interests include Neuroengineering applications of human computer interaction and
Neuroergonomics, specifically, i) development of noninvasive brain computer interfaces for
communication and augmented interactivity in simulation and gaming settings, ii) optical brain
imaging for assessment of cognitive workload and expertise development of operators and clinical
populations.

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

72

Near Infrared (fNIR) Spectroscopy

Gefen et al.

Banu ONARAL (S’76–M’78–SM’89–F’93) received the B.S.E.E. and M.S.E.E.
degrees from Boğaziçi University, Istanbul, Turkey, and the Ph.D. degree from
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, in 1978. Her academic focus
both in research and teaching is centered on information engineering with
special emphasis on complex systems and biomedical signal processing in
ultrasound and optics. She has led major research and development projects
sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF), National Institutes of
Health (NIH), Office of Naval Research (ONR), DARPA and Department of
Homeland Security (DHS). She supervised a large number of graduate
students to degree completion and has an extensive publication record in biomedical signals and
systems. She is the recipient of a number of faculty excellence awards including the 1990 Lindback
Distinguished Teaching Award of Drexel University, the EDUCOM Best educational Software award
and the NSF Faculty Achievement Award. Dr. Onaral’s translational research efforts for rapid
commercialization of biomedical technologies developed at Drexel and its partner institutions have
resulted in the creation of the Translational Research in Biomedical Technologies program. This
initiative brings together academic technology developers with entrepreneurs, regional economic
development agencies, local legal, business and investment communities. Under her leadership, the
program has been recognized by the Coulter Translational Research Partnership award. She is
currently leading the creation of the regional Translational Research Partnership Institute to pool
regional resources and assets to commercialize health care solutions. Dr. Onaral’s professional
services include chair and membership on advisory boards and strategic planning bodies of several
universities and funding agencies, including service on the National Science Foundation's
Engineering Advisory Board, and on the proposal review panels and study sections. She participated
in the strategic planning team charged with the creation of Sabancı University established in 1998 in
Istanbul, Turkey and served on its board of trustees. Her professional responsibilities have included
service on the Editorial Board of journals and the CRC Biomedical Engineering Handbook as Section
Editor for Biomedical Signal Analysis. She served as the President of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBS), the largest member-based biomedical engineering society in
the world. She organized and chaired the 1990 Annual International Conference of the EMBS and
Co-Chaired the 2004 Annual Conference of the Biomedical Engineering. She is a Fellow of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, the American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS) and a Founding Fellow of American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering
(AIMBE). She served on the inaugural Board of the AIMBE as publications chair and as Chair of the
Academic Council and as the President of the Turkish American Scientists and Scholars Association.

Copyright © 2014 by the Association for Information Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies
of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation on
the first page. Copyright for components of this work owned by others than the Association for Information
Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on
servers, or to redistribute to lists requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission to
publish from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or via email from ais@aisnet.org.

AIS Transactions on Human-Computer Interaction

Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp.55-73, September 2014

73

Transactions on
Human-Computer Interaction

ISSN: 1944-3900

Editors-in-Chief

http://thci.aisnet.org/

Dennis Galletta, U. of Pittsburgh, USA

Joe Valacich, U. of Arizona, USA

Advisory Board
Izak Benbasat
U. of British Columbia, Canada

John M. Carroll
Penn State U., USA

Phillip Ein-Dor
Tel-Aviv U., Israel

Jenny Preece
U. of Maryland, USA

Gavriel Salvendy
Purdue U., USA, & Tsinghua U., China

Ben Shneiderman
U. of Maryland, USA

Jane Webster
Queen's U., Canada

K.K. Wei
City U. of Hong Kong, China

Ping Zhang
Syracuse University, USA

Senior Editor Board
Fred Davis
U. of Arkansas, USA

Traci Hess
U. of Massachusetts Amherst, USA

Shuk Ying (Susanna) Ho
Australian National U., Australia

Mohamed Khalifa
U. Wollongong in Dubai., UAE

Jinwoo Kim
Yonsei U., Korea

Paul Benjamin Lowry
City U. of Hong Kong

Anne Massey
Indiana U., USA

Fiona Fui-Hoon Nah
U. of Nebraska-Lincoln, USA

Lorne Olfman
Claremont Graduate U., USA

Kar Yan Tam
Hong Kong U. of Science &
Technology, China

Dov Te'eni
Tel-Aviv U., Israel

Jason Thatcher
Clemson U., USA

Noam Tractinsky
Ben-Gurion U. of the Negev, Israel

Viswanath Venkatesh
U. of Arkansas, USA

Mun Yi
Korea Advanced Ins. of Sci. &
Tech, Korea

Miguel Aguirre-Urreta
DePaul U., USA

Michel Avital
Copenhagen Business School,
Denmark

Hock Chuan Chan
National U. of Singapore,
Singapore

Christy M.K. Cheung
Hong Kong Baptist University,
China

Michael Davern
U. of Melbourne, Australia

Alexandra Durcikova
U. of Oklahoma

Xiaowen Fang
DePaul University

Matt Germonprez
U. of Wisconsin Eau Claire, USA

Jennifer Gerow
Virginia Military Institute, USA

Suparna Goswami
Technische U.München, Germany

Khaled Hassanein
McMaster U., Canada

Milena Head
McMaster U., Canada

Netta Iivari
Oulu U., Finland

Zhenhui Jack Jiang
National U. of Singapore,
Singapore

Richard Johnson
SUNY at Albany, USA

Weiling Ke
Clarkson U., USA

Sherrie Komiak
Memorial U. of Newfoundland,
Canada

Na Li
Baker College, USA

Ji-Ye Mao
Renmin U., China

Scott McCoy
College of William and Mary, USA

Greg D. Moody
U. of Nevada, Las Vegas, USA

Robert F. Otondo
Mississippi State U., USA

Lingyun Qiu
Peking U., China

Sheizaf Rafaeli
U. of Haifa, Israel

Rene Riedl
Johannes Kepler U. Linz, Austria

Khawaja Saeed
Wichita State U., USA

Shu Schiller
Wright State U., USA

Hong Sheng
Missouri U. of Science and
Technology, USA

Stefan Smolnik
European Business School,
Germany

Jeff Stanton
Syracuse U., USA

Heshan Sun
Clemson U., USA

Horst Treiblmaier
Purdue U., USA

Ozgur Turetken
Ryerson U., Canada

Carina de Villiers
U. of Pretoria, South Africa

Fahri Yetim
U. of Oulu, Finland

Cheng Zhang
Fudan U., China

2001-2004: Ping Zhang

2004-2005: Fiona Fui-Hoon Nah

2005-2006: Scott McCoy

2006-2007: Traci Hess

2007-2008: Weiyin Hong

2008-2009: Eleanor Loiacono

2009-2010: Khawaja Saeed

2010-2011: Dezhi Wu

2011-2012: Dianne Cyr

2012-2013: Soussan Djamasbi

2013-2014: Na Li

Editorial Board

Meiyun Zuo
Renmin U., China

Managing Editors
Jeff Jenkins, Brigham Young U., USA

SIGHCI Chairs

http://sigs.aisnet.org/sighci

