NeuroPlace: Making Sense of a Place
Lulwah Al-Barrak

Dept. of Information Systems, King Saud University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

432203423@student.ksu.edu.sa

ABSTRACT
The ability to detect mental states, whether relaxation or stressed,
would be useful in categorizing places according to their impact
on our brains and many other domains. Newly available,
affordable
and
dry-electrode
devices
make
electroencephalography headsets (EEG) feasible to use outside the
lab, for example in open spaces and shopping malls. The purpose
of this pervasive experimental manipulation is to analyze brain
signals in order to label outdoor places according to how users
perceive them with a focus on ―relaxing and ―stressful mental
states. That is, when the user is experiencing tranquil brain waves
or not when visiting a particular place. This paper demonstrates
the potential of exploiting the temporal structure of EEG signals
in making sense of outdoor places. The EEG signals induced by
the place stimuli are analyzed and exploited to distinguish what
we refer to as a place signature.

Categories and Subject Descriptors

C.3 [Special-purpose and Application-based Systems]: Real-time and
embedded systems, H.5.m [Information Interfaces and Presentation
(e.g., HCI)]: Miscellaneous, I.2.9 [Robotics]: Sensors, J.3 [Life and
Medical Sciences]: Neuroscience, J.4 [Social and Behavioral Sciences].

General Terms

Experimentation, Documentation, Design, Human Factors.

Keywords
Mobile Sensing, EEG, Neurology, Pervasive Computing, Social
and Behavioral Sciences.

1. INTRODUCTION

Nowadays, people seem to spend most of their time indoor
working with various technologies. This may result in chronic
stress and inability to relax. High stress levels need to be treated
and managed using stress management techniques. Generally,
people spend their times in quiet places to help them relax and
cope with the hassle of modern busy life style.
Many studies have proved that spending time at relaxing places
can relieve stress. For example, Stigsdotter [20] and Kohlleppel
et al. [9] have shown that nature and gardens have a positive
impact on stress. In addition, Korpela et al. [10] showed that a
large number of people feel relaxed and their stress level
decreases at places such as, cafe, library, and zoo. In this paper,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
AH’13, March 7–8, 2013, Stuttgart, Germany.
Copyright 2013 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0010 …$10.00.

Eiman Kanjo

Dept. of Information Systems, King Saud University
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

ekanjo.c@ksu.edu.sa

we present a novel method for categorizing places based on the
current mental state sensed at an outdoor place to guide people to
relaxing places using brainwaves analysis.
Brain signals are electrical signals produced by the human brain,
known as brainwaves. Measuring brainwaves is done using a noninvasive and inexpensive method known as electroencephalogram
(EEG) [22]. Medical EEG sensors use a large number of
electrodes to detect accurate data. However, NeuroVigil Inc. [14]
has developed iBrain that can analyze brainwaves and map out
data to diagnose medical conditions using a single electrode. Also,
Emotiv [5] and NeuroSky [13] have developed EEG sensors
available in the market and can be used for different braincomputer Interaction (BCI) applications.
So far, the application of BCI technology has focused mainly on
four areas: communication, smart home control, assistive
technology [11] , and gaming [15]. While the majority of effort
continues into expanding and developing BCI methodology in the
ways described above, increasing attention is now being directed
towards investigating potential of BCI technology for outdoor
applications.
Sensed mental states of subjects can give us valuable information
on how people perceive places. The study has developed a mobile
application that is compatible with off-the-shelf EEG headsets to
collect brainwaves at different places. Alongside the EEG, we
also correlate the brainwaves with environmental noise levels in
order to analyze and process changes in patterns that exist in the
surrounding places. Once we have collected and analyzed our
data we aim at disseminating our results and findings in a form of
a mobile applications, map or web interface. The idea of this
framework is to give people the ability to choose the place(s) that
relaxed them the most. The EEG sensor that will be used in this
study, developed by NeuroSky is a dry sensor and requires no gel,
no expertise to wear, and it consists of two electrodes to detect
brainwaves.

2. RELATED WORK

EEG sensors have been used in a wide variety of applications. For
example, Ashkan et al. [1] have developed an EEG-based braincomputer interface system for implicit emotional tagging of
multimedia content. Also, Mostow et al. [12] have used EEG
sensors on students to monitor cognitive processing and their
mind state during learning. However, these EEG applications
were based on indoor use scenarios, and hence EEG sensors used
in non-mobile settings. SmartCap [19] have used a mobile EEG
and developed a monitoring system that fits on the head to
measure and monitor the car driver fatigue, which can help in
reducing the occurrences of incidents. Outdoor environments
require mobile technologies in order to facilitate data collection
such as mobile phones.
Recent availability of low-cost wireless electroencephalography
(EEG) headsets [5] [13]and programmable mobile phones capable

However, there is a need for more work in developing a practical
and robust brain-mobile phone interface not only capable of
working in controlled laboratory settings but also out while the
users on the move. Exploring the potential use of EEG in outdoor
environment is part of our on-going research.
In this paper, we discuss our broader vision of a brain mobile
phone interface and then present the initial design,
implementation, and evaluation of the NeuroPlace system.
Our initial results look promising showing that modern mobile
phones are capable of processing raw neural signals using an
affordable and commercial EEG headset.
In what follows, we define what we mean by a place, present an
overview of NeuroPlace architecture. We also discuss a number of
design considerations that directed our initial implementation in
another section.

3. OUR SENSE OF OUTDOOR PLACES

’Place’ is defined in geographic research as “space which people
have made meaningful” [4]. Perhaps more importantly, places are
reproduced through people’s imaginations, memories, emotions
and feelings, both positive and negative, and by using different
senses [18] [21]. Thrift [21] discusses place experiences during a
walk in the countryside as compared to a walk in the city. The
author illustrated how places are constructed through different
senses and people’s bodies. Such impressions can construct place
as welcoming and pleasant or hostile and aggressive.
By walking we can navigate our way and make sense of our
surroundings. We look for things that stand out because they are
different from their surrounds, or because they have a shape or
form or structure that we believe we could recognize again. Sense
of smell could lead us to tempting coffee aroma in nearby cafe.
Noisy playgrounds and high pollution omitted from traffic could
deter us from visiting the same place again.
Walks have been used, for example, in studies exploring the
relationship between people and urban environment [17] or the
role of places for people’s well-being [2]. In order to make the
walk tangible and recall it later voice recorder, photo or video
camera are often used by researchers [3]. New research methods
are needed for exploring people- place relations.
More creative and interactive methods based on ubiquitous
technologies are able to reveal the respondent’s whole body and
senses in generating knowledge and communicating a place. In so
doing, they reveal emotions triggered by direct contact with the
object or event is a particular event. Especially methods that can
be used ‘in the field’ enabled research participants to
communicate place by using their senses (olfactory, tactile,
auditory, and visual).
In this paper we define a place as an outdoor space that can be
visited by people such as gardens, shops and cafes.

4. NEUROPLACE ARCHITECTURE

Mobile phones are commonly used as sensors in outdoor
environments [7]. Our study uses mobile phones as a mean of
collecting and recording brainwaves data. The mobile phone and
the EEG headset are married to acquire EEG signals. After that,
the EEG data are correlated with environmental noise to filter any
noise from the signal. Data of one place collected are now ready
for offline analysis using different statistical models. Also, in
order to categorize places to be adapted to users’ needs, we will
apply classification functions. Classification of signal segments

into a given number of classes using segments features can be
achieved by various statistical and probabilistical methods.
Bayesian classifier or Logistic regression will be considered for
predicting the outcome of a categorical (a variable that can take
on a limited number of categories) dependent variable based on
one or more predictor variables (see Figure 1).

Signal
Acquisition

Signal
filtering

Signal
Analysis

Feature
extraction
Command

of running sophisticated data processing algorithms, gave us the
ability to interface neural signals to phones to deliver new mobile
computing paradigms.

Visualization
on Mobile

Figure 1. NeuroPlace system components
A mobile application for Android devices is developed to collect
EEG, environmental noise and location data, the application was
installed on Samsung Galaxy S2 Smartphone. The application
connects to the EEG headset via wireless connection. The mobile
application gives us the ability to move and take the experiments
to outdoor places. Figure 2 shows NeuroPlace running in real-time
while displaying data for attention, meditation levels, noise levels
as well as the values for different frequency bands and saves them
into log files. The subjects wear the EEG headset and run the
mobile application while going to different outdoor places. These
data are recorded in the mobile memory for offline analysis.

Figure 2. NeuroPlace Application
This study uses Mindwave Mobile EEG headset developed by
Neurosky. The participant wears the headset and run the mobile
application before reaching a place and when the participant
arrives at a specific place, she will mark that place aid us in
identifying EEG data for that particular place. The EEG headset
allows us to record a number of EEG data such as raw EEG,
different frequency bands, and two mental states (attention,
meditation). Neurosky headset calculates 8 different types of brain
waves. These eight frequency bands are in the following order:
delta (0.5 - 2.75Hz), theta (3.5 -6.75Hz), low-alpha (7.5 - 9.25Hz),
high-alpha (10 - 11.75Hz), low-beta (13 - 16.75Hz), high-beta (18
- 29.75Hz), low-gamma (31 - 39.75Hz), and mid-gamma (41 49.75Hz). These values have no units and therefore have a relative
meaning.
Neurosky provides attention and meditation mean levels ranging
from 0 to 100, see Figure 3. Those values are determined by

proprietary algorithms where values between 40 and 60 are
considered neutral or baseline. Values between 80 to 100 refer to
strongly elevated meditation/relaxation levels. Similarly, values
between 20 and 40 mean slightly lowered levels, and between 1
and 20 indicate strongly lowered levels. And finally, zero value
means the signal is subject to noise. Based on these levels, our
places are classified into different categories such as relaxing or
stressful place.

extract segments and identify features. For each of the segments,
feature were extracted and classes generated accordingly.
In this work we have adapted Neurosky mean meditation,
however in futrue work we are planning to implemnt our own
relaxation and stress classification functions.

Level

100
50

1
10
19
28
37
46
55
64
73
82
91
100
109
118

0
Time (sec)

Attention

Meditation

Figure 4. Map of places visited

Figure 3. Attention and meditation mental states features
provided by Neurosky

Evaluating systems that involve physiological and wearable
devices require to follow rigorous and yet stepwise process in
particular those related to EEG. The case of the envisaged
NeuroPlace system domain is no exception. In fact, bad test
design might lead to false positive results particularly when users
are instructed to manipulate the user interface while trying to
concentrate. Thus, two basic assurances are needed before
proceeding: to have a robust system that delivers adequately the
functional requirements; to provide a usable design that offers a
good user experience. Furthermore on the latter, final users can
hardly be used. In fact, patients can only asses the technology at
the final stages of evaluation.
The system functionality has been evaluated using basic user
experiences. Twenty female students participated in the
evaluation. We deployed 4 android mobile phones and 4
Mindwave EEG sensor models, daily, for one hour each around
our campus. Each user has repeated the test three times which has
given us 60 different data sets to analyze.
Each user had to walk along the path of 5 distinguished places
such as Starbucks, the conservatory, garden etc, see Figure 4 for
the map where the experiment took place. The noise meter and
GPS application were installed in the phone and its readings were
time stamped along with the various EEG frequency bands, eye
blink, attention and meditation levels. A post-experiment
interview revealed that the participants were comfortable with the
system.
All collected data, were subject to inspection and analysis to
remove any corrupt data using R project, a software environment
for statistical computing and graphics.
After the process of noise removal, further processing of the data
was carried out to chop the samples into small time periods to

30
20
10
0
1
78
155
232
309
386
463
540
617
694
771
848
925
1002
1079
1156

5. EVALUATION

40
Level

The data from EEG, NoiseSpy [6] and GPS are correlated and
time stamped in one data raw. Noise can detect some abnormal
environmental distractions which might affect user perception of a
place.

Time

Figure 5. Campus garden environmental noise levels
Figure 3 shows an averaged mental states levels of participants at
the campus garden, where it is clear that the majority of the
participants perceived the garden as a relaxing place. In addition,
when we look at the environmental noise level at the garden in
Figure 5, we notice that the environmental noise was high just
before reaching the garden. However, the noise levels were low
when the participant reached the garden since our garden is a
quite place and therefore the mental states are not affected by the
noise in this case. Some places such as cafés can be classified as
relaxing places but they hold high levels of environmental noise
and therefore need further analysis to detect the correct mental
state of the participant.
Box Plot in Figure6 is showing the Mean values of meditation
from all participants at each place respectively. Places such as
garden, and Starbucks have a mean meditation level of almost 80.
However, conservatory, snack shop, and student union have a
mean meditation value of 60 or less, which is considered as
neutral and therefore these places cannot be classified as relaxing
places. Whereas places that have a meditation level of 70 or
higher can be classified as relaxing places. In this experiment,
data were collected while environmental noise was low and
therefore the EEG headset recordings were not affected by noise.

Figure 6. Meditation Levels at different places

6. CONCUSION AND FUTURE WORK

Every human perceives outdoor space differently. Some places
are seen to be hectic and stressful, others as especially relaxing
and pleasant. This perception is subjective and emotions are
mapped in the brain as a reflection of the physical map. Sensing
this mind map can be achieved by using portable EEG sensors
then interpreting EEG signals to detect patterns of mental state.
In this work we explored the properties and temporal structure of
the EEG signal with the aim to classify outdoor places according
to the current mental states with a focus on relaxation, that is,
when the user is experiencing peaceful brain waves or not when
visiting a particular place. The EEG signals associated with the
place stimuli are analyzed and could be used to distinguish the
place type, which in turn could be exploited in classification.
NeuroPlace opens up new opportunities and challenges in
pervasive computing and mobile sensing.
Our long term research goals are to influence brainwaves by
guiding people to relaxing environments that suits their needs and
to provide simple relax stimulation based on place stimuli.
However our immediate objective in this project is to study the
changes in the participants’ brainwaves before and after reaching
a specific place. The EEG signals for the place stimuli will be
subjected to various feature extraction methods and temporal
manipulations. We are also planning to disseminate our results
and findings in a form of a mobile applications, map or web
interface.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research project SKERG111 was supported by grant RGPVPP-157 from the Deanship of Scientific Research of King Saud
University.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Ashkan Y., Jong-Seok L., and Touradj E. 2009. Implicit
emotional tagging of multimedia using EEG signals and
brain computer interface. In Proceedings of the first SIGMM
workshop on Social media (WSM '09). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 81-88. DOI=10.1145/1631144.1631160.
[2] Carpiano RM 2009. Come take a walk with me: The “Go
Along” interview as a novel method for studying the
implications of place for health and wellbeing. Health &
Place 15, 263–272.
[3] Cele S 2006. Communicating place, methods for
understanding children’s experiences of place.

Almqvist & Wiksell International, Stockholm.
[4] Cresswell T. 2004.Place: a short introduction.Black-well
Publishing, Oxford.
[5] Emotiv Systems. Available from www.Emotiv.com;
accessed 15 September, 2012.
[6] Kanjo, E. 2010. NoiseSPY: A Real-Time Mobile Phone
Platform for Urban Noise Monitoring and Mapping. Mob.
Netw.
Appl. 15,
4
(August
2010),
562-574.
DOI=10.1007/s11036-009-0217-y
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11036-009-0217-y
[7] Kanjo E., Bacon J.,Roberts D., and Landshoff P. 2009.
MobSens: Making Smart Phones Smarter. IEEE Pervasive
Computing
8,
4
(October
2009),
50-57.
DOI=10.1109/MPRV.2009.79.
[8] Kanjo, E., 2012. mFeel: An affective mobile system. IEEE
Pervasive
Computing,
11,
3,
43-45.
DOI=10.1109/MPRV.2012.45.
[9] Kohlleppel, T., Bradley, J., Jacob, S. 2002. A Walk through
the Garden: Can a Visit to a Botanic Garden Reduce Stress?.
HortTechnology.12,3, 489-492.
[10] Korpela, K., Hartig, T., Kaiser, F., Fuhrer, U. 2001.
Restorative Experience and Self-Regulation in Favorite
Places. ENVIRONMENT AND BEHAVIOR. 33, 4, 572589.
[11] Kubler, A.; Mushahwar, V.K.; Hochberg, L.R.; Donoghue,
J.P. 2006. BCI meeting 2005-workshop on clinical issues and
applications. Neural Systems and Reha. Eng., IEEE
Transactions on , 14, 2, 31-134.
[12] Mostow, J, Chang, K. and Nelson, J. 2011. Toward
exploiting EEG input in a reading tutor. In Proceedings of
the 15th international conference on Artificial intelligence in
education(AIED'11), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,
230-237.
[13] Neurosky. Available from www.neurosky.com; accessed 8
October, 2012.
[14] NeuroVigil. Available from http://www.neurovigil.com/;
accessed 2 October 2012.
[15] Nijholt, A., Reuderink, B. & Oude Bos, D. 2009, Turning
shortcomings into challenges: Brain-computer interfaces for
games,
Intelligent
Technologies
for
Interactive
Entertainment, Springer, pp. 153-168.
[16] Quiroga, R. 1998. Quantitative analysis of EEG
signals:Time-frequency methods and Chaos theory. Buenos
Aires, Argentinien.
[17] Raittila R 2006. Methodological approaches to preschool
children’s relationship with the urban environment. In
Proceedings of the international conference on
environmental education. Helsinki, 14 June 2005, 111–126.
University of Helsinki, Helsinki.
[18] Relph EC. 1976. Place and placelessness. Pion Press,London.
[19] SmartCap.
Available
from
http://www.smartcap.com.au/smartcap_overview.html;
accessed 20 September, 2012.
[20] Stigsdotter, U.A., Grahn, P. 2004. A garden at your
workplace may reduce stress, Design and Health III – Health
Promotion through Env. Design Research Centre for Design
and Health, 147–157.
[21] Thrift N. 2009. Space: the fundamental stuff of geog-raphy.
In Clifford N, Holloway SL, Rice SP & Val-entine G
(eds).Key concepts in geography Sage Publications, London.
[22] Wolpaw, J., Birbaumer, N., McFarland, D., Pfurtscheller, G.,
Vaughan, T. 2002. Brain-computer interface for
communication and control.

