The University of San Francisco

USF Scholarship: a digital repository @ Gleeson Library |
Geschke Center
Nursing and Health Professions Faculty Research
and Publications

School of Nursing and Health Professions

2012

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers
William Bosl
University of San Francisco, wjbosl@usfca.edu

Follow this and additional works at: http://repository.usfca.edu/nursing_fac
Part of the Bioinformatics Commons, Neurology Commons, Neuroscience and Neurobiology
Commons, and the Psychiatry Commons
Recommended Citation
Bosl, W. (2012). Neurotechnology and psychiatric biomarkers. In D. Ghista, (ed), Biomedical Engineering – Book 3. InTech
Publishers. DOI: 10.5772/19457

This Book Chapter is brought to you for free and open access by the School of Nursing and Health Professions at USF Scholarship: a digital repository
@ Gleeson Library | Geschke Center. It has been accepted for inclusion in Nursing and Health Professions Faculty Research and Publications by an
authorized administrator of USF Scholarship: a digital repository @ Gleeson Library | Geschke Center. For more information, please contact
repository@usfca.edu.

21
Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers
William J. Bosl
Harvard Medical School,
Children’s Hospital Boston Informatics Program,
Boston University School of Medicine Behavioral Neuroscience Program,
USA
1. Introduction
Neuroscience as a scientific discipline has enjoyed enormous growth and success in the past
decade. Some have called the early 20th century the golden age of physics, the latter half of
the 20th century a period when the genomic revolution blossomed and predict that the early
21st century will be a period when brain sciences achieve remarkable success. While
understanding the basic mechanisms of the brain and how they relate to thought and
behavior may be the foundation for applications to medicine, there is a great need for
technological innovation if more than academic results are to be achieved. The need for
neurotechnology is already great. Traumatic brain injury and damaged limbs require
prosthetic devices that can be controlled in some way by willful volition. Ideally, direct
connections between thought and action are desirable to restore natural functions. Mental
health is a branch of medicine that has long been relegated to a secondary status within
medicine. The reasons for this may be many, but they certainly include the difficulty of
understanding and measuring brain activity in a quantitative way and relating those
measurements to behavior and cognitive activity. As healthcare costs continue to spiral out
of control in both developed and developing regions of the world, the need for engineers to
become involved in neuroscience and neurotechnology research and development has never
been greater. Innovative engineering ideas, with a view toward practical application and
affordable cost have much to contribute to clinical applications of brain science. A key
contribution of neuroengineering will be innovative methods for quantitative measurement
of brain activity and mapping of those measurements to behavior and thought. The term
psychiatric biomarkers will be used here in this broad sense to indicate quantitative
measurements of the brain and the algorithms necessary to interpret them in psychiatric or
psychological descriptions or diagnoses.
One important way in which psychiatric biomarkers differ from other physiological
biomarkers is in that the mapping from biomarker to symptom or disease is much more
complex. A biomarker for a specific cancer, for example, may be a gene mutation that is in
some way directly involved in the disease progression itself. The relationship between
biomarker and the manifestation of interest – cancer, in this case – is rather simple and
direct. That is not to say that the gene or the gene expression patterns are simple to find, but
only that the conceptual relationship between the marker and disease is simple to
understand. In the case of psychiatric biomarkers, the phenomena of interest, thought and
behavior, are complex, emergent phenomena of brain neural activity. The relationship

www.intechopen.com

512

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

between neural firing patterns and the communication deficits that are clearly evident in a
person with a mental disorder is not at all clear, even if we posit that all thought is indeed
dependent upon neural activity. The relationship in this case is somewhat like the
relationship between letters of the alphabet and a metaphor in great literature. Certainly
metaphors depend on spelling and grammar, but the concept is much more than spelling
and grammar. Similarly, the complex patterns of neural activity that distinguish the way a
person with autism responds to someone speaking directly to them from someone
considered “normal” are quite complex.
Normal and abnormal behavior are differentiated by subtle, complex patterns of activity
that a trained expert observes or discovers through systematic diagnostic tests. If brain
function and behavior are mirrors of each other, as is commonly accepted (Cowan and
Kandel, 2001; Hyman, 2007; Kandel, 1998; Singh and Rose, 2009), then biomarkers of mental
disorders may be hidden in subtle, complex patterns of neurobiological data. There is a
growing realization that the neurophysiological mechanisms that underlie brain function
cannot be understood by pure reduction to physiological causes (Stam, 2005; Ward, 2003).
The dynamics of the brain is inherently nonlinear, exhibiting emergent dynamics such as
chaotic and transiently synchronized phenomena that may be central to understanding the
mind-brain relationship (Varela et al., 2001) or the ‘dynamic core’ (Le Van Quyen, 2003). The
behaviors and thoughts that characterize mental dysfunction may be emergent phenomena
or complex patterns of physiological processes, especially neural processes. For example,
major depression or the communication deficits present in a child with autism are emergent
phenomena that reflect complex patterns in brain function that differ from some sociallydefined norm. The task of the neuroengineer is to create new technology to measure and
interpret the patterns of brain activity that connect brain measurements to observed
behavioral patterns.
A key challenge in cognitive neuropsychiatry is to discover the neural correlates underlying
behavior. To be clinically useful, these discoveries must be accompanied by technology that
enables brain activity to be measured and interpreted safely, inexpensively and easily. The
explosive growth of neuroimaging studies that link functional brain activity to behavior
promises exciting opportunities for measuring nonlinear brain activity that may indicate
abnormalities or allow response to therapy to be monitored. While several imaging
modalities are available for neuroscience research, most have significant limitations that
prohibit their use as routine clinical tools. Cost and ease of use are essential qualities for
clinically useful tools, which may not be as important or relevant in a scientific research
context. Neuroengineers must be cognizant of these constraints when considering the
intended use of the technology.
Measurements of brain electrical activity with electroencephalography (EEG) have long
been a valuable source of information for neuroscience research, yet this rich resource may
be under-utilized for clinical applications in neurology and psychiatry (Niedermeyer, 2003;
Niedermeyer and Lopes da Silva, 2005). To fully exploit this data, methods for discovering
subtle nonlinear patterns and deeper understanding of the relationship between emergent
signal features, neurophysiology and behavior are needed. Near infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS) has recently been introduced as a safe, portable alternative for measuring blood
oxygen level dependent (BOLD) response in infants (Irani et al., 2007; Muehlemann et al.,
2008). One of the primary advantages of NIRS, like EEG, is that it is safe for all ages,
relatively inexpensive and portable. As a new brain-imaging tool, much remains to be
discovered about the value and limitations of NIRS as a clinical instrument. In addition,

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

513

coupling EEG and NIRS may have some advantages for clinical use and remains to be
explored by researchers. Many of the advances in non-invasive functional brain
measurement are being driven by the brain computer interface community, where mobility
and cost requirements limit the technologies that can be adopted (Dornhege, 2007).
Neuropsychology and cognitive neuropsychiatry can learn from this community, while
adapting the methods to the particular needs of behavioral, affective and cognitive
assessment.
In this chapter some relevant information concerning our current understanding of complex
network organization and implications for finding neural correlates of behavior will be
reviewed with goal of motivating engineers to consider contributing their skills to
developing new neurotechnology. Considerable attention will be given to EEG
measurements as one of the most promising technologies for clinical application to
neuropsychiatry. Novel methods for extracting information from EEG signals are beginning
to appear, taking advantage of advances in the physics of nonlinear systems and signals,
complex network theory and machine learning algorithms. The need for innovative
neurotechnology to meet the need for mental and neurological healthcare in developing
regions of the world is great, but the promise is even greater. The primary goal of this
chapter is to provide information to enable researchers interested in brain disorders and
mental health to become involved in creating innovative neurotechnology for clinical use.

2. The brain as a complex system
2.1 Complex networks
The human brain contains on the order of 1011 neurons and more than 1014 synaptic
connections (Kandel et al., 2000). Although sparsely connected, each neuron is within a few
synaptic connections of any other neuron (Buzsáki, 2006). This remarkable connectivity is
achieved by a kind of hierarchical organization that is not fully understood in the brain, but
is ubiquitous in nature, called scale-free or complex networks (Barabasi, 2009; Bassett and
Bullmore, 2006; Ravasz and Barabasi, 2003). Complex networks are characterized by dense
local connectivity and sparser long-range connectivity (Barabasi, 2009) that is fractal or selfsimilar at all scales.
Many brain disorders appear to be associated with abnormal brain connectivity that may
vary between different regions and different scales (Bassett and Bullmore, 2009; Craddock et
al., 2009; Noonan et al., 2009). Examples include autism (Belmonte et al., 2004; Noonan et al.,
2009), schizophrenia (Raghavendra et al., 2009; Uhlhaas et al., 2008; Whittington, 2008),
depression (Li et al., 2008; Sheline et al., 2009) and epilepsy (Douw et al., 2010; Percha et al.,
2005). Methods for estimating neural connectivity or changes in neural connectivity might
be effective diagnostic biomarkers for abnormal connectivity development that is associated
with brain dysfunction. The electrical signals produced by neural networks are believed to
contain information about the neural network structure on several scales in the vicinity of
the EEG sensor (Raghavendra et al., 2009; Stam, 2005; Zavaglia et al., 2008).
Novel analysis methods from nonlinear systems theory are able to extract information from
EEG signals that reflect the underlying network organization. System invariants will be
encoded in the time series produced and measured by EEG sensors (Fuchs et al., 2007; Gao
and Jin, 2009). Multiscale entropy (MSE) is one invariant measure of system dynamics that
has been shown to particularly sensitive to changes in physiological systems (Costa et al.,
2005b; Hu et al., 2009b; Takahashi et al., 2010), including mental disorders such as

www.intechopen.com

514

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

Alzheimer’s Disease (Abasolo et al., 2006), schizophrenia (Takahashi et al., 2010), the effect
of antipsychotic drugs (Takahashi et al., 2010) normal aging (Bruce et al., 2009) and autism
spectrum disorders (Bosl et al., 2011).
A comparison of functional network properties using fMRI showed that children and
young-adults' brains have similar "small-world" organization at the global level, but differ
significantly in hierarchical organization and interregional connectivity (Supekar et al.,
2009). The networks measured with fMRI in this study are those that are formed among
correlated voxels, which may represent a different spatial scale from that measured by
single EEG sensors. Transient or sustained generalized synchronization between EEG
sensors is another measurement of functional connectivity in the brain. A simultaneous
study of EEG and fMRI signals in patients with a degenerative type of epilepsy showed that
in the non-myoclonus state, subtle abnormalities that were detected in EEG signals did not
affect fMRI, suggesting that EEG measurements of connectivity may measure different
connectivity or may be more sensitive to temporal synchronization that occurs on a time
scale less than that of fMRI (on the order of one second).
Neuroscience has made great progress using linear methods of spectral (Fourier) analysis, it
is likely that much more information is contained in the complex patterns of brain activity
(see, for example, (Bruce et al., 2009). EEG may be under-utilized for clinical applications in
neurology and psychiatry (Niedermeyer, 2003; Niedermeyer and Lopes da Silva, 2005)
particularly now as new developments in complex systems and multivariate nonlinear time
series analysis may allow previously unexplored information to be extracted from EEG
signals (Kulisek et al., 2008; Mizuhara et al., 2005; Stam, 2005; Varela et al., 2001). Sensors
such as EEGs measure the coordinated electrical response of many neurons to produce time
series that reflect the dynamics of this complex system. In order to extract salient
information from this data, methods appropriate for analyzing nonlinear time series are
required. Although many useful techniques for nonlinear time series and system analysis
have been developed in other disciplines (Bosl, 2000; Braha et al., 2006; Elnashaie and Grace,
2007; Holland, 1995; Stauffer, 2006), it is not immediately clear which are most appropriate
for neuroscience research. Nevertheless, recent research results are quite promising.
The complexity of EEG signals was found in one study to be associated with the ability to
attend to a task and adapt to new cognitive tasks; a significant difference in complexity was
found between normal subjects and those with diagnosed schizophrenia (Li et al., 2008).
Schizophrenic patients were found to have lower complexity than normal controls in some
EEG channels and significantly higher interhemispheric and intrahemispheric cross mutual
information values (another measure of signal complexity) than normal controls (Na et al.,
2002).
Methods for chaotic signal and phase synchronization analysis arose from a need to
rigorously describe physical phenomena that exhibited what was formerly thought to be
purely stochastic behavior but was then discovered to represent complex, aperiodic selforganized dynamics (Pikovsky et al., 2001). The analysis of signal complexity and
interaction between signals leading to transient synchronization may reveal information
about local neural complexity and long-range communication between brain regions
(Buzsáki, 2006; Stam, 2005; Varela et al., 2001).
The synchronization patterns of complex networks have been shown to be closely related to
the topology of the network (Arenas et al., 2006) and are related to brain connectivity
(Sakkalis et al., 2008). EEG signals are believed to derive from pyramidal cells aligned in
parallel in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus (Sörnmo and Laguna, 2005), which act as

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

515

many interacting nonlinear oscillators (Nunez and Srinivasan, 2006). As a consequence of
the scale-free network organization of neurons, EEG signals exhibit complex system
characteristics reflecting the underlying network topology, including transient
synchronization between frequencies, short and long range correlations and crossmodulation of amplitudes and frequencies (Gans et al., 2009). A great deal of information
about interrelationships in the nervous system likely remains hidden because the linear
analysis techniques currently in use fail even to detect them (Drongelen, 2007).
2.2 Mental processes as emergent phenomena
Much of modern scientific medicine is reductionist, involving a search for ultimate basic
causes of disease. This paradigm for scientific research follows naturally from the
extraordinary success of physics in the last century, with its search for the fundamental laws
of the universe. But that model is giving way to a new vision of the universe as a complex
dynamical system, one in which fundamental laws may in fact be emergent properties of the
system (Laughlin, 2005).
Emergent properties are those that result from the organization of individual parts and do
not exist apart from the organizational whole. The saying that the whole is more than the
sum of the parts is a description of an emergent property. The process of cell division, for
example, is an emergent process that cannot be explained or studied using quantum
mechanics – even though quantum mechanics is a good description of how atoms interact,
and a cell is made up of many atoms, each obeying the fundamental physics of quantum
theory. Similarly, the difference between a well-written high school essay for a college
admissions committee and a Pulitzer Prize winning novel is not to be found in grammar and
spelling, even though proper spelling and grammar are essential to the meaning of
literature. Literature, genre and metaphor are emergent phenomena, more than words and
sentences.
Developing neurotechnology, including devices and analysis methods, may be the most
challenging subfield of biomedical engineering because the phenomenon of interest, a
mental state or a complex set of behaviors that may indicate a diagnosis of a mental
disorder, is an emergent phenomenon. Human behavior is controlled by the brain, which is
ultimately a complex network of neurons that transmit electrochemical signals. Thought and
behavior cannot be understood or measured by studying neurons (or genes) alone.
Psychiatric biomarkers that focus on complex system properties may be the most
informative measurements for assessing mental state. We now present a survey of complex
system properties that can be computed from time series of brain electrical activity. Neural
activity is electrochemical activity. Taking into account degradation due to the skull and
scalp and the introduction of noise by the electronic sensors, EEG may be the most direct
measurement of brain function that is possible. Thought might be considered an emergent
phenomenon of neural electrical activity.

3. Methods
3.1 Univariate measures
Many different methods for computing the complexity of time series have been defined and
used successfully to analyze EEG data (Chen et al., 2009; Kuusela et al., 2002). Sample
entropy, a measure of nonlinear time series complexity, was significantly higher in certain
regions of the right hemisphere in pre-term neonates that received skin-to-skin contact than

www.intechopen.com

516

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

in those that did not, indicating faster brain maturation (Scher et al., 2009). Sample entropy
has also been used as a marker of brain maturation in neonates (de la Cruz et al., 2007) and
was found to increase prenatally until maturation at about 42 weeks, then decreased after
newborns reached full term (Zhang et al., 2009). A study of the correlation dimension
(another measure of signal complexity) of EEG signals in healthy subjects showed an
increase with aging, interpreted as an increase in the number of independent synchronous
networks in the brain (Stam, 2005).
Intuitively, complexity is associated with structural richness, depth, patterns upon
patterns, incorporating correlations over multiple spatio-temporal scales (Costa et al.,
2005b). There is no consensus on a definition of complexity, but algorithms have been
developed to attempt to give meaning to complexity. In the context of time series analysis,
the concept of entropy is relevant. The use of entropy measures to describe the
information content of time series began with the publication of Shannon’s Mathematical
Theory of Communication (Shannon and Weaver, 1949). In an intuitive sense, information
is a measure of the difference in uncertainty before and after a measurement. In the
context of time series, information is related to the predictability of the series. Entropy is a
mathematical function of the probability that the next point in a sequence or time series
will be a certain values, given the previous (Baddeley, 2000). Several different entropy
measures can be defined algorithmically, including Shannon entropy, spectral entropy,
approximate entropy, Lempel-Ziv complexity and sample entropy (Sabeti et al., 2009),
each with certain advantages for particular time series characteristics (length, amount of
noise, for example). The sample entropy has been used for a number of investigations of
physiological signals. Changes in sample entropy appear to correlate with aging and
pathological conditions in the context of cardiac health (Bruce et al., 2009; Costa et al.,
2008; Norris et al., 2008) and for normal brain development (Zhang et al., 2009) and to
distinguish certain mental disorders such as schizophrenia (Sabeti et al., 2009; Takahashi
et al., 2010).
The multiscale entropy (MSE) analysis is one method for computing the complexity of a
time series that builds on the sample entropy and expands the concept. It has been used to
analyze a number of physiological processes (Costa et al., 2005b; Hornero et al., 2009; Norris
et al., 2008; Takahashi et al., 2010). The multiscale entropy algorithm incorporates two steps.
The first is a coarse-graining procedure that uses successive averaging of a time series to
create new coarse-grained time series. For a window size τ, τ = 1, 2, … j, the jth coarse-grain
series, yτj, is computed by averaging non-overlapping windows:

y τj =

1

∑x
jτ

τ i= ( j−1)τ +1i

(1)

where xi is the original time series of length N and τ is the scale factor satisfying 1< τ < N/τ.
A schematic illustration of this process is shown in equation 2.

(2)

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

517

The coarse-graining method for extracting signal variability on different scales used by
(Costa et al., 2005b) seems to be a heuristic procedure without any solid theoretical
foundation. Other procedures can be substituted that may be justified on similar grounds.
Perhaps the most immediate alternative would be to use the median rather than the mean
value in each coarse graining step. This would have the effect of emphasizing the variability
of the original signal rather than smoothing out such variability. Another procedure would
be to select every kth point from the original series, where k is the desired scale, and use a
pre-selected window size to compute an average value at the kth point. A systematic
discussion and computational experiments have yet to be done for the coarse graining
procedure that is central to the multiscale entropy algorithm.
The second step is to then compute the entropy of each of the coarse-grain time series yτj,
using some entropy measure. The sample entropy is the most common entropy formulation
to be used for analyzing physiological signals (Costa et al., 2005b). A useful variation to the
original multiscale entropy algorithm uses the modified sample entropy defined in (Xie et
al., 2008). The practical effect of using the modified sample entropy is the computed entropy
values are more robust to noise and results are more consistent with short time series. In
brief, the similarity functions Am and Bm defined by equations (7) and (9) in (Xie et al., 2008)
are computed for each coarse-grained time series defined in equation 1. The modified
multiscale entropy (mMSE) is then defined as the series of modified sample entropy values
at each of the coarse grain scales. This method was used for complexity analysis of EEG time
series as a biomarker for autism risk (Bosl, et al. 2011).
An alternative to the MSE is the scale dependent Lyapunov exponent (SDLE) algorithm
described in (Gao, 2007; Gao et al., 2006). This measure of complexity is stable for short,
noisy time series and reportedly is able to distinguish a number of different types of chaotic
motion, including noise-induced chaos, stochastic oscillations and others, which entropy
measures are not able to do. SDLE has not yet been used to analyze EEG signals in young
children or infants. The SDLE algorithm is based on following the time evolution of all pairs
of vectors in phase space that satisfy a given embedding restriction. This results in a rather
straightforward algorithm for computing the SDLE. The SDLE is reportedly better at
distinguishing noise from chaotic dynamics in time series. SDLE was shown to be a more
effective measure of heart disease than sample entropy and MSE (Hu et al., 2009a).
Similarly, SDLE was shown to be more effective in retrospectively identifying changes in
EEG signal complexity just prior to the onset of epileptic seizures than MSE, but few other
studies of SDLE with EEG time series have been done. This is a potentially promising
measure to be investigated further.
3.2 Detecting nonlinearity in time series
Living systems exhibit a fundamental propensity to move forward in time. This property
also describes physical systems that are far from an equilibrium state. For example, heat
moves in only one direction, from hot to cold areas. In thermodynamics, this property is
related to the requirement that all systems must move in the direction of higher entropy.
Time irreversibility was found to be a characteristic of healthy human heart
electrocardiogram (EKG) recordings and was shown to be a reliable way to distinguish
between actual EKG recordings and model EKG simulations (Costa et al., 2008). EKG signals
from patients with congestive heart disease were found to have lower time irreversibility
indices than healthy patients (Costa et al., 2005a). Interestingly, time irreversibility of EEG
signals has been associated with epileptic regions of the brain and this measure has been

www.intechopen.com

518

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

proposed as a biomarker for seizure foci (Gautama et al., 2003). Time irreversibility may be
used as a practical test for nonlinearity in a time series.
As an illustration, a time irreversibility index (trev) was computed for different resolutions of
the EEG time series using the algorithm of (Costa et al., 2008). The third column of Figure 1
shows trev for several different linear and nonlinear time series. Of particular note is that
only the sine wave time series and both random time series have nearly zero irreversibility
indices, while the index for the nonlinear logistic series and the representative EEG signal
are both nonzero on all scales shown.

Fig. 1. Characteristics of five different time series are shown. Column 1 shows the time series
amplitudes. Column two is the multiscale entropy, where the horizontal axis is the coarse
graining scale, from 1 to 20. Column 3 is the multiscale time asymmetry value. The value of
a in the lower right corner of the time asymmetry plot is the value of the time asymmetry
index summed over scales 1 to 5. A non-zero time asymmetry value is a sufficient condition
for nonlinearity of a time series.
After computing multiple resolutions of the EEG time series using the multiscale algorithm
shown in equation 2, an estimate of the time irreversibility for each resolution is computed
by noting that a symmetric function or time series will have the same number of increments
as decrements. That is, the number times |xi+1 – xi | > 0 will be approximately the same as
the number of times |xi+1 – xi | < 0. Thus, an estimate of the time series symmetry (or
reversibility) was found by summing increments and decrements and dividing by the length
of the series. A reversible time series will have a value of zero. For a series of 5000 points, as

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

519

used in figure 1, trev > 0.1 is a significant indicator of irreversibility and thus of nonlinearity
(Schreiber and Schmitz, 1997). This information is used only to indicate that nonlinear
information is contained in the EEG time series that is not used in linear analysis methods,
suggesting that the MSE may contain more diagnostically useful information than power
spectra analysis alone.
Additional methods for characterizing nonlinear signals may be derived from recurrence
plot analysis, to be discussed separately below. Communications and electrical engineers
may be especially well suited to research in analyzing brain activity and applying methods
from communication signals analysis to find information that can be correlated to
behavioral and cognitive assessment data. Integration of new results from both nonlinear
time series analysis and complex network research may prove to be a fruitful approach for
engineers interested in finding patterns in neural activity that are correlated to complex
behavioral patterns that psychiatrists and psychologists use to characterize mental health.
3.3 Synchronization
While signal complexity is a property of a single time series or EEG channel, transient
synchronized activity is a measure of the interaction between different channels and an
indication of communication and coordination between different brain regions.
Synchronization may be used as a marker for diagnosing underlying mental disorders that
involve aberrant long-range connectivity in the brain and may also reveal causal
mechanisms (Whittington, 2008). The complexity of synchronization patterns appears to
change during network development and reflects different neural wiring schemes and levels
of cluster organization (Fuchs et al., 2007).
The synchronization patterns of complex networks have been shown to be closely related to
the topology of the network (Arenas et al., 2006) and are related to brain connectivity
(Sakkalis et al., 2008). Synchronization between sensors is an indicator of connectivity
between brain regions on a scale commensurate with the sensor spacing. EEG signals are
believed to derive from pyramidal cells aligned in parallel in the cerebral cortex and
hippocampus (Sörnmo and Laguna, 2005), which act as many interacting nonlinear
oscillators (Nunez and Srinivasan, 2006). Synchronization between gamma activity
(typically defined to be 30-50 Hz range) is believed to be involved in long-range
communication between brain regions. A possible link between gamma activity and the
hemodynamic response measured by fMRI was found in a study of auditory response.
Distinct activations in the gamma frequency range were found in subcortical structures,
including the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) and thalamus (Mulert et al., 2007).
Synchronized oscillations are transiently stable, thus form and decay rapidly. Synchrony can
result from a common input oscillator, such as in cardiac synchronization. It can also be an
emergent, self-organized phenomenon that is related to the network structure itself. The
latter is of particular relevance to the search for psychiatric biomarkers that are associated
with complex behaviors. The complexity of synchronization patterns appears to change
during network development and reflects different neural wiring schemes and levels of
cluster organization (Fuchs et al., 2007). It is thus reasonable to suppose that the developing
brain will show different but characteristic synchronization patterns at different
developmental stages. While the fundamental neurophysiological correlates of these
patterns may be difficult to ascertain, they nevertheless may serve as a marker for normal
and abnormal brain functional development. The emergence of a “social brain network”
during early childhood was found in a study of evoked response potentials (ERPs) in 3-, 4-,

www.intechopen.com

520

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

and 12-month-old infants viewing faces of different orientation and direction of eye gaze
(Johnson et al., 2005), suggesting a particular pattern of brain connectivity that develops in
early childhood. Default mode networks (DMNs) found in adults and (negatively)
associated with particular cognitive and sensorimotor activities were lacking in a study of
(premature) 3 month old infants (Fransson et al., 2007). However, resting state networks
have recently been shown to emerge in the first year of life, suggesting development of
brain networks and their potential disruption in neurodevelopmental disorders (Supekar et
al.; Uddin et al., 2010).
There is no consensus at this time on the best methods for determining nonlinear
synchronization in neurological data and a number of different algorithms have been
proposed (Kreuz et al., 2007; Sakkalis et al., 2009). Although strong signal synchronization
would likely be detected by any of several nonlinear synchronization measures, two
measures that are based on different algorithmic approaches are chosen here (see (Sakkalis
et al., 2009) for more thorough discussion of some of the relative merits of each).
Two methods outlined here for computing bivariate synchronization matrix are: (1) the
synchronization likelihood (SL) method (Montez et al., 2006); and (2) the instantaneous cross
modulation from the circular phase Hilbert transform-based synchronization index (HI),
which is robust to signal noise and short time windows (Gans et al., 2009).
Synchronization indices may be searched for correlation in each frequency bands using
centered moving averages (Bashan et al., 2008). This approach will find weak or strong
correlations with time lags. For each pair, the relative phase index can be computed and
stored in a correlation matrix. At each time, some channels may be synchronized. A
clustering algorithm can be applied to all channels at a single (averaged) time segment. The
result is analogous to gene expression profile clustering (Ramoni et al., 2002). Statistical
significance of clusters can be determined by assigning a numerical label to each channel
involved in a cluster and the fractional overlap of clusters in different individuals computed.
Synchronized clusters may also exhibit very low frequency oscillations, with frequencies of
1 to 0.01 hertz. These have been found in fMRI studies of default mode networks (Broyd et
al., 2009; Greicius et al., 2008; Uddin et al., 2010).
Synchronization likelihood (SL) is a method based on the assumption that neurons are
highly nonlinear devices, hence methods from chaotic dynamical systems may effectively
capture the relevant dynamics of the system (Sakkalis et al., 2009). It is an unbiased
generalized synchronization method that relies on detection of simultaneously occurring
patterns that may differ in two time series. A method for automatically computing all but
two user parameters for the SL algorithm has been developed and will be used here
(Montez et al., 2006).
Instantaneous cross modulation (synchronization) of EEG channels can be computed using
the Hilbert transform method (Gans et al., 2009). This method is robust to noise and detects
synchronization across all frequency bands. The n:m cyclic relative phase index y1,2 between
two signals, f1(t) and f2(t), at a specific time t is computed over a time interval using a sliding
window as:
n ,m
Ψ 1,2
( t ) = nφ1 ( t ) − mφ2 ( t ) , mod 1

(3)

where f(t)=arctan(H(y)/y) and H(y) is the Hilbert transform of the time series y. This
approach is stable for nonstationary data (Gans et al., 2009), which is appropriate for our

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

521

data. The mod 1 term ensures that significant phase differences will be detected even in the
presence of noise-induced phase jumps. In most cases n=m=1 is commonly assumed,
though cross correlation of signals with n not equal m will be used here. Two signals are
defined to be synchronized when Ψ1,2 is less than a specified constant. This algorithm is
stable for nonstationary data and will detect synchronization without the need to
distinguish between noise and chaos (Gans et al., 2009). A sliding window will be used to
compute sync over 5 minutes.
A number of methods have been used for determining synchronization in neurological data
and a number of different algorithms have been proposed (Kreuz et al., 2007; Sakkalis et al.,
2009). Although useful, many of these methods have difficulties with nonstationary,
nonlinear signals and either fail to find true synchrony or introduce spurious
synchronization (Fine et al., 2010). Spurious synchronization due to volume conduction
effects can be removed by applying a spatial algorithm to ICA decomposition (Hironaga
and Ioannides, 2007). ICA eliminates volume conduction effects while maintaining the same
time resolution, thus still allowing generalized synchronization to be computed.
As Fourier spectrum can only give meaningful interpretation to linear and stationary
processes, its application to data from nonlinear and nonstationary processes is
problematical. A relatively new method for extracting instantaneous phase and frequency
information from both linear and nonlinear, chaotic signals is the Huang-Hilbert transform
(Huang and Wu, 2005; Huang et al., 2009). Determination of instantaneous phase and
frequency is usually accomplished using the Hilbert transform method (Kreuz et al., 2007).
However, this is only appropriate for monofrequency analytic signals that have a single
center of rotation in the complex plane. The Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD)
introduced by Huang makes no assumptions about linearity. The EMF decomposes a
nonlinear, nonstationary time series into adaptively determined characteristic time scales of
each of the components (Huang et al., 2009). These component functions are termed intrinsic
mode functions (IMF) and are analogous to Fourier components in a traditional linear
decomposition. The IMFs computed using the empirical mode transform (EMF) have the
property of a single center of rotation in the complex plane, ideally satisfying the
requirements for the application of the Hilbert transform to determine instantaneous phase
and frequency (Fine et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2009).
After computation of IMFs for each EEG channel, the IMF components with the highest
power will be used to compute an instantaneous phase coherence matrix, R, using a sliding
window. Following (Bialonski and Lehnertz, 2006), R is computed:
⎛ 1 w−1
⎞
Rij = ⎜ ∑ ei(φit −φ jt ⎟ , mod 1
⎜w
⎟
⎝ t =0
⎠

(4)

where w is the number of time samples in the time series segment or window, i and j
designate the channel number (or the IMF component of the channel) and
f(t)=arctan(H(y)/y) and H(y) is the Hilbert transform of the IMF component. The mod 1
term ensures that significant phase differences will be detected even in the presence of
noise-induced phase jumps. The Hilbert transform obtains the best fit of a sinusoid to each
IMF at every point in time, identifying an instantaneous frequency (IF), along with its
associated instantaneous amplitude (IA). The IF and IA provide a time-frequency
decomposition of the data that is highly effective at resolving non-linear and transient
features. This algorithm is stable for nonstationary data and will detect synchronization

www.intechopen.com

522

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

without the need to distinguish between noise and chaos (Gans et al., 2009). An example of
bivariate synchronization between two EEG sensors in the right medical parietal region is
shown in figure 2. The synchronization likelihood in this example was computed using the
only the first three IMFs from each sensor, without searching for cross band
synchronization.
To identify synchronized clusters of EEG channels, a method based on an eigenvector space
method, using eigenvalues of R, can be used, following the algorithm developed and
applied in (Allefeld and Bialonski, 2007; Bialonski and Lehnertz, 2006; Fine et al., 2010). The
outcome of this algorithm will be synchronized clusters of EEG channels. These may be
mapped onto scalp plots and the identified clusters compared to default mode networks
that have been identified in young children (Sauseng and Klimesch, 2008; Supekar et al.,
2009; Supekar et al., 2010). It will be of particular interest to determine if synchronization
clusters are significantly correlated with functional networks in the brain and are
biomarkers of abnormalities in brain network function (Assaf et al., 2010; Kennedy and
Courchesne, 2008). To date, most research on functional brain networks, including the
default mode network, has relied on functional MRI. Networks determined by fMRI reflect
only the hemodynamic or metabolic response of neurons (Power et al., 2010). This can be
considered a kind of amplitude correlation but not true synchronization of brain regions.
If synchronization of electrical activity can be shown to be an alternative measure of brain
network activity it would open up much more exploration of the role of brain networks in
cognitive activity, brain computer interfaces and neuropsychiatric disorders. Aberrations to
default mode networks have been implicated in a number of brain disorders (Broyd et al.,
2009) including post traumatic stress syndrome (Daniels et al., 2010), social phobias (Gentili
et al., 2009), depression (Sheline et al., 2009), ADHD (Uddin et al., 2008), autism (Di Martino
et al., 2009), and schizophrenia (Lagioia et al., 2010). fMRI is far too expensive to be used
routinely as a clinical screening and monitoring tool. Yet the apparent widespread role of
synchronized brain networks in many neuropsychiatric disorders suggests that a less
expensive and easy to administer technology for analyzing brain networks would be widely
useful in clinical practice.
3.3 Recurrence quantitative analysis
Several univariate measures of time series complexity and a number of approaches for
computing the degree of synchronization between signals have been used to analyze EEG
data. Applications of these methods to psychiatric care and mental health continue to show
promise. A more general framework for characterizing the dynamics of complex systems
may be to construct recurrence plots (Marwan et al., 2007) and compute quantitative
properties. The idea to use recurrence plots as a representation of complex system dynamics
was first proposed by (Eckmann et al., 1987) in the late 1980s. The original tool presented a
graphical means for visualizing differences in system dynamics. Methods for quantifying
the small scale structures in recurrence plots were devised and shown to be capable of
revealing system parameters and transitions that are not easily obtained by other methods
(Marwan et al., 2002; Zbilut et al., 2002). Some dynamical parameters, such as K2 entropy
and mutual information can also be derived from recurrence plots without RQA methods by
computing the distribution of line lengths in the recurrence plot (Marwan et al., 2007).
Readers are referred to the references for reviews of this unifying approach to nonlinear
systems analysis.

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

523

(Schinkel et al., 2007) demonstrated that a single measure from RQA analysis could detect a
change in the N400 response in single trials when subjects were presented with an oddball
task, suggesting that RQA may be a sensitive measure of transient brain states. Few studies
have been done using RQA to determine more stable brain functional characteristics. This
may be a promising new field for research on EEG biomarkers of psychiatric disorders.

4. Clinical applications
4.1 Infant brain development and autism spectrum disorders
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) constitutes a heterogeneous developmental syndrome that
is characterized by a triad of impairments that affect social interaction, communication
skills, and a restricted range of interests and activities (APA, 2000), with highly variable
outcomes. Studies have consistently shown that early intervention leads to better long-term
outcomes. But early intervention is predicated on early detection. Behavioral measures have
thus far proven ineffective in diagnosing autism before about 18 months of age, in part
because the behavioral repertoire of infants is so limited. Neural development may precede
overt behavioral observations and thus provide an earlier marker for emerging autistic
behaviors. Yet, measuring functional brain development is difficult because few
noninvasive methods are available for infants and it is not clear what features to measure
that are biomarkers of normal development. As discussed above, multiscale entropy
computed from EEG time series has been shown to be a particularly informative analysis
tool for physiological signals.
Complex mental disorders such as autism are associated with abnormal brain connectivity
that may vary between different regions and different scales (Noonan et al., 2009).
Estimation of changes in neural connectivity might be an effective diagnostic biomarker for
abnormal connectivity development that leads to ASD behaviors. The electrical signals
produced by neural networks are believed to contain information about the network
structure (Raghavendra et al., 2009; Stam, 2005; Zavaglia et al., 2008). The physics of
complex networks suggests that system invariants will be encoded in the time series
produced and measured by EEG sensors (Fuchs et al., 2007; Gao and Jin, 2009). Multiscale
entropy (MSE) discussed above is one invariant measure of system dynamics that has been
shown to particularly sensitive to changes in physiological systems (Costa et al., 2005b; Hu
et al., 2009b; Takahashi et al., 2010), including mental disorders such as Alzheimer’s Disease
(Abasolo et al., 2006), schizophrenia (Takahashi et al., 2010), the effect of antipsychotic drugs
(Takahashi et al., 2010) and normal aging (Bruce et al., 2009). Preliminary results suggest
that MSE may be a biomarker for autism endophenotypes (Bosl et al., 2011) and may
provide an earlier diagnosis than behavioral assessments.
MSE values were computed for 79 different infants: 46 at high risk for ASD (hereafter
referred to as HRA) based on having an older sibling with a confirmed diagnosis of ASD
and 33 controls, defined on the basis of a typically developing older sibling and no family
history of neurodevelopmental disorders. The study participants were part of an on-going
longitudinal study and for this analysis visits were evaluated at regular intervals. Infants
were seated on their mothers’ laps in a dimly lit room while a research assistant engaged
their attention by blowing bubbles. This procedure was followed to limit the amount of
head movement made by the infant that would interfere with the recording process.
Continuous EEG was recorded with a 64-channel Sensor Net System. The data were
amplified, filtered (band pass 0.1-100.0 Hz), and sampled at a frequency of 250 Hz. Data

www.intechopen.com

524

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

were manually reviewed to remove sections with obvious artifacts and continuous, clean 20
second segments were identified to compute alert, resting state MSE values.
Results shown in figure 2 were computing by averaging all channels in a given region,
including left/right hemispheres, left/right frontal and total scalp MSE values. The plots are
derived by averaging regional MSE values for all infants at a given age. These reveal a
significant difference between high risk and typically developing infants (Bosl et al., 2011).
The data suggest that there are not only significant differences between the high risk group
and typically developing controls, but MSE follows characteristic trajectories during
development. To our knowledge, these preliminary results are the first demonstration of a
complex systems analysis of EEG data for biomarkers in infants at risk for a complex
neurodevelopmental disorder. More details about this study and the use of machine
learning to discover diagnostically significant patterns in MSE data can be found in (Bosl et
al., 2011).

Fig. 2. The change in mean MSE over all channels is shown for each age. Averaging over
all channels reveals that in general MSE is higher than the normal controls than in the
high risk group, but regional differences cannot be seen.
The trajectory of the curves between 6 and 12 months in figure 2 appear to be as informative
as information at any specific age. This is a period of important changes in brain function
that are foundational for the emergence of higher level social and communicative skills that
are at the heart of ASD. A key characteristic of autism is lack of social perception; autistic
spectral disorders are also associated with abnormal brain connectivity (Belmonte et al.,
2004; Kleinhans et al., 2008). A number of major cognitive milestones typically occur
beginning at around the age 9 months and perhaps earlier in girls. These include joint
perception (Behne et al., 2005) and loss of the ability to discriminate certain categories of
faces (Pascalis et al., 2002). The latter developments are especially significant because they
reveal how socially-grounded experiences influence changes in the neurocognitive mechanisms
that underlie speech and face processing. In a prospective study, (Ozonoff et al., 2010)
found that social communicative behaviors in infants that later developed ASD declined
dramatically between 6 and 18 months when compared to typically developing infants. The
results shown here may indicate that MSE is sensitive to neural correlates underlying the
observed social and cognitive developments.

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

525

Currently there are no objective medical tests for diagnosing autism. According to the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), data strongly suggest better outcomes in children
whose conditions are diagnosed early and participate in early intervention programs.
Children who are diagnosed early and given intensive behavioral intervention can often be
mainstreamed and live normal, productive lives. The AAP recommends that all children be
screened for autism at 18 and again at 24 months. Unfortunately, behavioral assessment is
time consuming and requires specialized training, both of which pose a problem for routine
screening. Because atypical brain development is likely to precede abnormal behavior by
months or even years, a critical developmental window for early intervention may be
missed if diagnosis is based entirely on a behavioral phenotype. If reliable methods can be
developed to lower the age of diagnosis, and if insight is gained into the biological
mechanisms that underlie the disorder, it may be possible to develop intervention strategies
that can be implemented during the first year of life. Complex systems analysis of EEG may
enable a relatively inexpensive and reliable way to estimate the risk of developmental
disorders within the first year of life.
4.2 Schizophrenia
Early studies of signal synchronization in patients diagnosed with schizophrenia used a
linear measure of complexity based on global correlation of all channels (Wackermann et al.,
1993) and synchronization based on linear correlation between amplitudes (Saito et al.,
1998). Although these methods will necessarily miss nonlinear signal characteristics, they
found significant differences between patients and normal controls that were interpreted to
reflect decreased coordination between different brain regions, a characteristic of
schizophrenia (Uhlhaas et al., 2008; Whittington, 2008).
One interpretation of biological complexity is that it reflects a systems’ ability to quickly
adapt and function in a changing environment (Costa et al., 2005b). The complexity of EEG
signals was found in one study to be associated with the ability to attend to a task and adapt
to new cognitive tasks; a significant difference in complexity was found between normal
subjects and those with diagnosed schizophrenia (Li et al., 2008). Schizophrenic patients
were found to have lower complexity than normal controls in some EEG channels and
significantly higher interhemispheric and intrahemispheric cross mutual information values
(another measure of signal complexity) than the normal controls (Na et al., 2002).
While signal complexity is a property of a single time series or EEG channel, transient
synchronized activity is a measure of the interaction between different channels and an
indication of communication and coordination between different brain regions.
Synchronization may be used as a marker for diagnosing underlying mental disorders such
as schizophrenia and may also reveal causal mechanisms (Whittington, 2008). The
complexity of synchronization patterns changes during network development and reflects
different neural wiring schemes and levels of cluster organization (Fuchs et al., 2007).
Abnormalities in phase synchronization between multiple bands have been found to be
sensitive biomarkers for mental dysfunction in schizophrenic patients (Uhlhaas et al., 2008;
Whittington, 2008). Unfortunately, similar abnormalities in synchronous activity have been
found associated with a number of other mental disorders (Uhlhaas et al., 2008), so further
research is required to discover if more refined patterns of synchrony exist for
discriminating different disorders or subtypes. A developmental perspective may be useful
here. For example, while many attempts to correlate cortical thickness with intelligence have
failed, recent research demonstrated that specific characteristic growth trajectories of cortical

www.intechopen.com

526

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

thickness from infancy to early teen years were highly correlated with above or below
average intelligence (Shaw et al., 2006), suggesting that growth curves of brain function may
contain more information than any combination of measurements at one specific age. This
would require routine brain measurements become part of the medical record and
algorithms that recognize abnormal trends would need to be used to interpret data after
regular checkups.

5. Neurotechnology for global mental health
Mental healthcare in developing nations has long been overlooked by organizations
concerned with global health needs. A number of reasons can be cited for this, but one
significant factor is the difficulty of accurately diagnosing and classifying mental disorders
and the relatively intensive need for human expertise to administer assessments and care.
Precision healthcare is a term coined by Clayton Christensen to describe objective medical
diagnosis and prescription that is enabled by new technologies. Innovative
neurotechnologies that enable basic mental diagnosis to be administered in a cost effective
manner in clinics that may be staffed by technicians is urgently needed in developing
nations. Even if the diagnostic precision is not as high as might be possible in big city
hospital in the developed world, low-cost basic care would serve to alleviate a great deal of
personal suffering as well as the economic burden imposed.
The need for neurotechnology to enable precision mental healthcare has never been greater.
The developed world is spending greater and greater amounts of money on healthcare and
costs threaten their economic vitality. Developing nations will benefit tremendously from
even basic neurological and mental healthcare.
While considerable resources have been devoted to finding cures for infectious diseases
such as HIV and malaria, relatively little attention has been given to the neurological and
cognitive effects of these infections on young patients that recover from the acute infection.
A majority of HIV infected patients manifest HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders
despite receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy (Van Rie et al., 2009). The developing
brains of children who have acquired HIV through vertical infection are particularly
vulnerable to central nervous system insults either directly, through secondary infections or
from side effects of antiretroviral therapies (LLorente et al., 2009). For example, school age
children with perinatally acquired HIV infections receiving antiretroviral therapy displayed
lower cognitive function than either HIV affected or HIV unaffected children. Although the
antiretroviral therapy reduced HIV symptoms, the cognitive deficits were not improved
(Puthanakit et al., 2010).
These clinical observations inform the need to obtain a better understanding of how and
when HIV affects cognitive function and to develop novel therapeutic drug candidates to
prevent or interfere with progression of HIV associated neurocognitive impairment
(Robertson et al., 2010). Some treatments for the primary or secondary infections, may be
more harmful to vulnerable brain tissue in children that have been compromised by HIV
infection than in adults (LLorente et al., 2009). Research on the effects of HIV infection on
the developing brain is a topic of increasing importance as new antiretroviral treatments
become more widely available causing many more HIV-1 infections to be treated as a
chronic condition to be managed rather than as a fatal disease (Abubakar et al., 2008). Few
longitudinal studies have been done of HIV infected children in developing regions who
have been receiving antiretroviral therapy. The methods for measuring and analyzing brain

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

527

electrical activity developed here may help to fill the need for objective, cross-cultural
measures of cognitive function to estimate the effects of HIV on brain development in
children.
It is hoped that neuroengineers will adopt methods outlined in this chapter to discover
biomarkers for monitoring the progression of cognitive development and demonstration
their utility in the context of HIV associated neurocognitive disability (HAND). Protocols
are needed for early assessment and diagnosis of mental and cognitive impairment due to
HIV infection, secondary infections and drug therapy. These may also be used as a clinical
tool for widespread screening of HIV infected or exposed infants that may enable
developmental cognitive impairments to be diagnosed before other HIV symptoms are
apparent. Such tools would represent a major step forward in the effort to understand the
long-term impact of chronic HIV infection and other infections on cognitive development in
children and to provide a new approach for monitoring the cognitive effects of long term
management of HIV as a chronic condition in developing regions of the world.

6. Conclusion
Neuroscience has been called the next frontier science after the breakthroughs achieved by
physics in the mid-twentieth century and genetics and biophysics at the end of the 20th
century and early 21st century. The brain is of great scientific interest because of the
emergent phenomenon of thought that arises from the vast complexity of this organ. While
the question of how the brain thinks is likely to remain a challenging scientific and
philosophical topic for a long time, the need for practical innovations to meet the healthcare
needs of the world is more urgent. Two issues drive this need at the present time. First, of
course, is the tremendous amount of suffering that is the result of brain injury and mental
disease. Mental disorders in particular are a difficult challenge for medicine because in most
cases there is not a single cause that can easily be diagnosed and “cured”. Rather, the
perspective throughout this chapter has been that mental disorders are complex emergent
phenomena and must therefore be analyzed as such.
This is an exciting and promising time for clinical neuroscience research due to the
convergent development of several technologies at this time in history. Although EEG
equipment has been around since the 1920s, the creation of inexpensive, wireless, high
quality EEG headsets by innovative companies such as Emotiv Systems and Neurosky
opens up research possibilities with EEG equipment for many more neuroscientists. As the
cost comes down and quality goes up, these tools become practical for routine clinical use.
The rapid development of the physics of complex networks and systems, as well as
mathematical methods for analyzing complex (chaotic) time series that are produced by
complex networks enables new information from the signals measured with inexpensive
EEG devices to be extracted and studied as markers for neural correlates of behavior.
Finally, the continuing advance of pattern recognition algorithms from the artificial
intelligence community enables more subtle pattern-markers to be discovered in complex
EEG signal features.
The high cost of healthcare threatens the economies of developed nations and prevents
many people in developing regions from obtaining the psychiatric care that they need. On
both of these fronts, innovative neurotechnologies for early detection and monitoring of
mental disorders are urgently needed. The ready availability of mobile communication
devices introduces a platform for making information technology based mental healthcare

www.intechopen.com

528

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

available to many people that have no access at this time. Integration of EEG devices and
complex systems methods with clinical decision support tools and mobile device-based
health records promises both greatly improved neuropsychiatric healthcare and lower costs.
It is hoped that the methods introduced in this chapter will inspire a new generation of
bioengineers concerned with mental health to create new tools for clinical neuroscience
while closing the gap between neurology and psychiatry.

7. Acknowledgements
This research was supported by grants from the National Institute of Mental Health and the
Simons Foundation.

8. References
Abasolo, D., Hornero, R., Espino, P., Alvarez, D., and Poza, J. (2006). Entropy analysis of the
EEG background activity in Alzheimer's disease patients. Physiol Meas 27, 241-253.
Abubakar, A., Van Baar, A., Van de Vijver, F.J., Holding, P., and Newton, C.R. (2008).
Paediatric HIV and neurodevelopment in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review.
Trop Med Int Health 13, 880-887.
Allefeld, C., and Bialonski, S. (2007). Detecting synchronization clusters in multivariate time
series via coarse-graining of Markov chains. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter
Phys 76, 066207.
Arenas, A., Diaz-Guilera, A., and Perez-Vicente, C.J. (2006). Synchronization reveals
topological scales in complex networks. Phys Rev Lett 96, 114102.
Assaf, M., Jagannathan, K., Calhoun, V.D., Miller, L., Stevens, M.C., Sahl, R., O'Boyle, J.G.,
Schultz, R.T., and Pearlson, G.D. (2010). Abnormal functional connectivity of
default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients. Neuroimage 53,
247-256.
Baddeley, R. (2000). Information Theory and the Brain (New York, Cambridge University
Press).
Barabasi, A.L. (2009). Scale-free networks: a decade and beyond. Science 325, 412-413.
Bashan, A., Bartsch, R., Kantelhardt, J.W., and Havlin, S. (2008). Comparison of detrending
methods for fluctuation analysis. Physica A 387, 5080-5090.
Bassett, D.S., and Bullmore, E. (2006). Small-world brain networks. Neuroscientist 12, 512523.
Bassett, D.S., and Bullmore, E.T. (2009). Human brain networks in health and disease. Curr
Opin Neurol 22, 340-347.
Behne, T., Carpenter, M., Call, J., and Tomasello, M. (2005). Unwilling versus unable: infants'
understanding of intentional action. Dev Psychol 41, 328-337.
Belmonte, M.K., Allen, G., Beckel-Mitchener, A., Boulanger, L.M., Carper, R.A., and Webb,
S.J. (2004). Autism and abnormal development of brain connectivity. J Neurosci 24,
9228-9231.
Bialonski, S., and Lehnertz, K. (2006). Identifying phase synchronization clusters in spatially
extended dynamical systems. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 74, 051909.
Bosl, W.J. (2000). Modeling Complex Crustal Processes. In GeoComplexity and the Physics
of Earthquakes, J.R. Rundle, D.L. Turcotte, and W. Klein, eds. (Washington, D.C.,
American Geophysical Union).

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

529

Bosl, W.J., Tager-Flusberg, H., and Nelson, C.A. (2011). EEG Complexity as a Biomarker for
Autism Spectrum Disorder. BMC Medicine 9.
Braha, D., Minai, A., and Bar-Yam, Y. (2006). Complex engineered systems : science meets
technology (Berlin ; New York, Springer).
Broyd, S.J., Demanuele, C., Debener, S., Helps, S.K., James, C.J., and Sonuga-Barke, E.J.
(2009). Default-mode brain dysfunction in mental disorders: a systematic review.
Neurosci Biobehav Rev 33, 279-296.
Bruce, E.N., Bruce, M.C., and Vennelaganti, S. (2009). Sample entropy tracks changes in
electroencephalogram power spectrum with sleep state and aging. J Clin
Neurophysiol 26, 257-266.
Buzsáki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the brain (Oxford ; New York, Oxford University Press).
Chen, W., Zhuang, J., Yu, W., and Wang, Z. (2009). Measuring complexity using FuzzyEn,
ApEn, and SampEn. Med Eng Phys 31, 61-68.
Costa, M., Goldberger, A.L., and Peng, C.K. (2005a). Broken asymmetry of the human
heartbeat: loss of time irreversibility in aging and disease. Phys Rev Lett 95, 198102.
Costa, M., Goldberger, A.L., and Peng, C.K. (2005b). Multiscale entropy analysis of
biological signals. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 71, 021906.
Costa, M.D., Peng, C.K., and Goldberger, A.L. (2008). Multiscale analysis of heart rate
dynamics: entropy and time irreversibility measures. Cardiovasc Eng 8, 88-93.
Cowan, W.M., and Kandel, E.R. (2001). Prospects for neurology and psychiatry. Jama 285,
594-600.
Craddock, R.C., Holtzheimer, P.E., 3rd, Hu, X.P., and Mayberg, H.S. (2009). Disease state
prediction from resting state functional connectivity. Magn Reson Med 62, 16191628.
Daniels, J.K., McFarlane, A.C., Bluhm, R.L., Moores, K.A., Clark, C.R., Shaw, M.E.,
Williamson, P.C., Densmore, M., and Lanius, R.A. (2010). Switching between
executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations
in functional connectivity. J Psychiatry Neurosci 35, 258-266.
de la Cruz, D.M., Manas, S., Pereda, E., Garrido, J.M., Lopez, S., De Vera, L., and Gonzalez,
J.J. (2007). Maturational changes in the interdependencies between cortical brain
areas of neonates during sleep. Cereb Cortex 17, 583-590.
Di Martino, A., Ross, K., Uddin, L.Q., Sklar, A.B., Castellanos, F.X., and Milham, M.P. (2009).
Functional brain correlates of social and nonsocial processes in autism spectrum
disorders: an activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Biol Psychiatry 65, 6374.
Dornhege, G. (2007). Toward brain-computer interfacing (Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press).
Douw, L., de Groot, M., van Dellen, E., Heimans, J.J., Ronner, H.E., Stam, C.J., and
Reijneveld, J.C. (2010). 'Functional connectivity' is a sensitive predictor of epilepsy
diagnosis after the first seizure. PLoS One 5, e10839.
Drongelen, W.v. (2007). Signal processing for neuroscientists : introduction to the analysis of
physiological signals (Burlington, Mass., Academic Press).
Eckmann, J., Kaphorst, S.O., and Ruelle, D. (1987). Recurrence plots of dynamical systems.
Europhysics Letters 5, 973-977.
Elnashaie, S., and Grace, J.R. (2007). Complexity, bifurcation and chaos in natural and manmade lumped and distributed systems. Chemical Engineering Science 62, 32953325.

www.intechopen.com

530

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

Fine, A.S., Nicholls, D.P., and Mogul, D.J. (2010). Assessing instantaneous synchrony of
nonlinear nonstationary oscillators in the brain. J Neurosci Methods 186, 42-51.
Fransson, P., Skiold, B., Horsch, S., Nordell, A., Blennow, M., Lagercrantz, H., and Aden, U.
(2007). Resting-state networks in the infant brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104,
15531-15536.
Fuchs, E., Ayali, A., Robinson, A., Hulata, E., and Ben-Jacob, E. (2007). Coemergence of
regularity and complexity during neural network development. Dev Neurobiol 67,
1802-1814.
Gans, F., Schumann, A.Y., Kantelhardt, J.W., Penzel, T., and Fietze, I. (2009). Crossmodulated amplitudes and frequencies characterize interacting components in
complex systems. Phys Rev Lett 102, 098701.
Gao, J. (2007). Multiscale analysis of complex time series : integration of chaos and random
fractal theory, and beyond (Hoboken, N.J., Wiley-Interscience).
Gao, J.B., Hu, J., Tung, W.W., and Cao, Y.H. (2006). Distinguishing chaos from noise by
scale-dependent Lyapunov exponent. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 74,
066204.
Gao, Z., and Jin, N. (2009). Complex network from time series based on phase space
reconstruction. Chaos 19, 033137.
Gautama, T., Mandic, D.P., and Van Hulle, M.M. (2003). Indications of nonlinear structures
in brain electrical activity. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 67, 046204.
Gentili, C., Ricciardi, E., Gobbini, M.I., Santarelli, M.F., Haxby, J.V., Pietrini, P., and
Guazzelli, M. (2009). Beyond amygdala: Default Mode Network activity differs
between patients with social phobia and healthy controls. Brain Res Bull 79, 409413.
Greicius, M.D., Kiviniemi, V., Tervonen, O., Vainionpaa, V., Alahuhta, S., Reiss, A.L., and
Menon, V. (2008). Persistent default-mode network connectivity during light
sedation. Hum Brain Mapp 29, 839-847.
Hironaga, N., and Ioannides, A.A. (2007). Localization of individual area neuronal activity.
Neuroimage 34, 1519-1534.
Holland, J. (1995). Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity (New York, AddisonWesley Publishing Co.).
Hornero, R., Abasolo, D., Escudero, J., and Gomez, C. (2009). Nonlinear analysis of
electroencephalogram and magnetoencephalogram recordings in patients with
Alzheimer's disease. Philos Transact A Math Phys Eng Sci 367, 317-336.
Hu, J., Gao, J., Tung, W.W., and Cao, Y. (2009a). Multiscale analysis of heart rate variability:
a comparison of different complexity measures. Ann Biomed Eng 38, 854-864.
Hu, J., Gao, J., Tung, W.W., and Cao, Y. (2009b). Multiscale Analysis of Heart Rate
Variability: A Comparison of Different Complexity Measures. Ann Biomed Eng.
Huang, N.E., and Wu, Z. (2005). An Adaptive Data Analysis Method for nonlinear and
Nonstationary Time Series:
The Empirical Mode Decomposition and Hilbert Spectral Analysis (Greenbelt, MD, NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center).
Huang, N.E., Wu, Z., Long, S.R., and Arnold, K.C. (2009). On Instantaneous Frequency.
Advances in Adaptive Data Analysis 1, 177-229.
Hyman, S.E. (2007). Can neuroscience be integrated into the DSM-V? Nat Rev Neurosci 8,
725-732.

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

531

Irani, F., Platek, S.M., Bunce, S., Ruocco, A.C., and Chute, D. (2007). Functional near infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS): an emerging neuroimaging technology with important
applications for the study of brain disorders. Clin Neuropsychol 21, 9-37.
Johnson, M.H., Griffin, R., Csibra, G., Halit, H., Farroni, T., de Haan, M., Tucker, L.A.,
Baron-Cohen, S., and Richards, J. (2005). The emergence of the social brain
network: evidence from typical and atypical development. Dev Psychopathol 17,
599-619.
Kandel, E.R. (1998). A new intellectual framework for psychiatry. Am J Psychiatry 155, 457469.
Kandel, E.R., Schwartz, J.H., and Jessell, T.M. (2000). Principles of neural science, 4th edn
(New York, McGraw-Hill Health Professions Division).
Kennedy, D.P., and Courchesne, E. (2008). The intrinsic functional organization of the brain
is altered in autism. Neuroimage 39, 1877-1885.
Kleinhans, N.M., Richards, T., Sterling, L., Stegbauer, K.C., Mahurin, R., Johnson, L.C.,
Greenson, J., Dawson, G., and Aylward, E. (2008). Abnormal functional
connectivity in autism spectrum disorders during face processing. Brain 131, 10001012.
Kreuz, T., Mormann, F., Andrzejak, R., Kraskov, A., and Lehnertz, K. (2007). Measuring
synchronization in coupled model systems: A comparison of different approaches.
Physica D 225, 29-42.
Kulisek, R., Hrncir, Z., Hrdlicka, M., Faladova, L., Sterbova, K., Krsek, P., Vymlatilova, E.,
Palus, M., Zumrova, A., and Komarek, V. (2008). Nonlinear analysis of the sleep
EEG in children with pervasive developmental disorder. Neuro Endocrinol Lett 29,
512-517.
Kuusela, T.A., Jartti, T.T., Tahvanainen, K.U., and Kaila, T.J. (2002). Nonlinear methods of
biosignal analysis in assessing terbutaline-induced heart rate and blood pressure
changes. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 282, H773-783.
Lagioia, A., Van De Ville, D., Debbane, M., Lazeyras, F., and Eliez, S. (2010). Adolescent
resting state networks and their associations with schizotypal trait expression.
Front Syst Neurosci 4.
Laughlin, R.B. (2005). A different universe : reinventing physics from the bottom down
(New York, Basic Books).
Le Van Quyen, M. (2003). Disentangling the dynamic core: a research program for a
neurodynamics at the large-scale. Biol Res 36, 67-88.
Li, Y., Tong, S., Liu, D., Gai, Y., Wang, X., Wang, J., Qiu, Y., and Zhu, Y. (2008). Abnormal
EEG complexity in patients with schizophrenia and depression. Clin Neurophysiol
119, 1232-1241.
LLorente, A.M., Lopresti, C., and Satz, P. (2009). Neurobehavioral and Neurodevelopmental
Sequelae Associated with Pediatric HIV Infection. In Handbook of Clinical Child
Neuropsychology, C.R. Reynolds, and E. Fletcher-Janzen, eds. (New York, Springer
Science + Business Media), pp. 635-669.
Marwan, N., Romano, M.C., Thiel, M., and Kurths, J. (2007). Recurrence plots for the
analysis of complex systems. Physics Reports 438, 237-329.
Marwan, N., Wessel, N., Meyerfeldt, U., Schirdewan, A., and Kurths, J. (2002). Recurrenceplot-based measures of complexity and their application to heart-rate-variability
data. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 66, 026702.

www.intechopen.com

532

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

Mizuhara, H., Wang, L.Q., Kobayashi, K., and Yamaguchi, Y. (2005). Long-range EEG phase
synchronization during an arithmetic task indexes a coherent cortical network
simultaneously measured by fMRI. Neuroimage 27, 553-563.
Montez, T., Linkenkaer-Hansen, K., van Dijk, B.W., and Stam, C.J. (2006). Synchronization
likelihood with explicit time-frequency priors. Neuroimage 33, 1117-1125.
Muehlemann, T., Haensse, D., and Wolf, M. (2008). Wireless miniaturized in-vivo near
infrared imaging. Opt Express 16, 10323-10330.
Mulert, C., Leicht, G., Pogarell, O., Mergl, R., Karch, S., Juckel, G., Moller, H.J., and Hegerl,
U. (2007). Auditory cortex and anterior cingulate cortex sources of the early evoked
gamma-band response: relationship to task difficulty and mental effort.
Neuropsychologia 45, 2294-2306.
Na, S.H., Jin, S.H., Kim, S.Y., and Ham, B.J. (2002). EEG in schizophrenic patients: mutual
information analysis. Clin Neurophysiol 113, 1954-1960.
Niedermeyer, E. (2003). The clinical relevance of EEG interpretation. Clinical EEG
(electroencephalography) 34, 93-98.
Niedermeyer, E., and Lopes da Silva, F.H. (2005). Electroencephalography : basic principles,
clinical applications, and related fields, 5th edn (Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams
& Wilkins).
Noonan, S.K., Haist, F., and Muller, R.A. (2009). Aberrant functional connectivity in autism:
evidence from low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations. Brain Res 1262, 48-63.
Norris, P.R., Stein, P.K., and Morris, J.A., Jr. (2008). Reduced heart rate multiscale entropy
predicts death in critical illness: a study of physiologic complexity in 285 trauma
patients. J Crit Care 23, 399-405.
Nunez, P.L., and Srinivasan, R. (2006). Electric fields of the brain : the neurophysics of EEG,
2nd edn (New York, Oxford University Press).
Ozonoff, S., Iosif, A.M., Baguio, F., Cook, I.C., Hill, M.M., Hutman, T., Rogers, S.J., Rozga,
A., Sangha, S., Sigman, M., et al. (2010). A prospective study of the emergence of
early behavioral signs of autism. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 49, 256-266
e251-252.
Pascalis, O., de Haan, M., and Nelson, C.A. (2002). Is face processing species-specific during
the first year of life? Science 296, 1321-1323.
Percha, B., Dzakpasu, R., Zochowski, M., and Parent, J. (2005). Transition from local to
global phase synchrony in small world neural network and its possible
implications for epilepsy. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 72, 031909.
Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M., and Kurths, J. (2001). Synchronization : a universal concept in
nonlinear sciences (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
Power, J.D., Fair, D.A., Schlaggar, B.L., and Petersen, S.E. (2010). The development of human
functional brain networks. Neuron 67, 735-748.
Puthanakit, T., Aurpibul, L., Louthrenoo, O., Tapanya, P., Nadsasarn, R., Insee-ard, S., and
Sirisanthana, V. (2010). Poor cognitive functioning of school-aged children in
thailand with perinatally acquired HIV infection taking antiretroviral therapy.
AIDS Patient Care STDS 24, 141-146.
Raghavendra, B.S., Dutt, D.N., Halahalli, H.N., and John, J.P. (2009). Complexity analysis of
EEG in patients with schizophrenia using fractal dimension. Physiol Meas 30, 795808.
Ramoni, M.F., Sebastiani, P., and Kohane, I.S. (2002). Cluster analysis of gene expression
dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99, 9121-9126.

www.intechopen.com

Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers

533

Ravasz, E., and Barabasi, A.L. (2003). Hierarchical organization in complex networks. Phys
Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 67, 026112.
Robertson, K., Liner, J., Hakim, J., Sankale, J.L., Grant, I., Letendre, S., Clifford, D., Diop,
A.G., Jaye, A., Kanmogne, G., et al. (2010). NeuroAIDS in Africa. J Neurovirol 16,
189-202.
Sabeti, M., Katebi, S., and Boostani, R. (2009). Entropy and complexity measures for EEG
signal classification of schizophrenic and control participants. Artif Intell Med 47,
263-274.
Saito, N., Kuginuki, T., Yagyu, T., Kinoshita, T., Koenig, T., Pascual-Marqui, R.D., Kochi, K.,
Wackermann, J., and Lehmann, D. (1998). Global, regional, and local measures of
complexity of multichannel electroencephalography in acute, neuroleptic-naive,
first-break schizophrenics. Biol Psychiatry 43, 794-802.
Sakkalis, V., Doru Giurc Neanu, C., Xanthopoulos, P., Zervakis, M.E., Tsiaras, V., Yang, Y.,
Karakonstantaki, E., and Micheloyannis, S. (2009). Assessment of linear and
nonlinear synchronization measures for analyzing EEG in a mild epileptic
paradigm. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed 13, 433-441.
Sakkalis, V., Tsiaras, V., Michalopoulos, K., and Zervakis, M. (2008). Assessment of neural
dynamic coupling and causal interactions between independent EEG components
from cognitive tasks using linear and nonlinear methods. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med
Biol Soc 2008, 3767-3770.
Sauseng, P., and Klimesch, W. (2008). What does phase information of oscillatory brain
activity tell us about cognitive processes? Neurosci Biobehav Rev 32, 1001-1013.
Scher, M.S., Ludington-Hoe, S., Kaffashi, F., Johnson, M.W., Holditch-Davis, D., and Loparo,
K.A. (2009). Neurophysiologic assessment of brain maturation after an 8-week trial
of skin-to-skin contact on preterm infants. Clin Neurophysiol 120, 1812-1818.
Schinkel, S., Marwan, N., and Kurths, J. (2007). Order patterns recurrence plots in the
analysis of ERP data. Cogn Neurodyn 1, 317-325.
Schreiber, T., and Schmitz, A. (1997). Discrimination power of measures for nonlinearity in a
time series. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 55, 5443-5447.
Shannon, C.E., and Weaver, W. (1949). A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Bell
System Technical Journal 27, 379-423.
Shaw, P., Greenstein, D., Lerch, J., Clasen, L., Lenroot, R., Gogtay, N., Evans, A., Rapoport,
J., and Giedd, J. (2006). Intellectual ability and cortical development in children and
adolescents. Nature 440, 676-679.
Sheline, Y.I., Barch, D.M., Price, J.L., Rundle, M.M., Vaishnavi, S.N., Snyder, A.Z., Mintun,
M.A., Wang, S., Coalson, R.S., and Raichle, M.E. (2009). The default mode network
and self-referential processes in depression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106, 19421947.
Singh, I., and Rose, N. (2009). Biomarkers in psychiatry. Nature 460, 202-207.
Sörnmo, L., and Laguna, P. (2005). Bioelectrical signal processing in cardiac and
neurological applications (Amsterdam ; Boston, Elsevier Academic Press).
Stam, C.J. (2005). Nonlinear dynamical analysis of EEG and MEG: review of an emerging
field. Clin Neurophysiol 116, 2266-2301.
Stauffer, D. (2006). Biology, sociology, geology by computational physicists, 1st edn
(Amsterdam ; Boston, Elsevier).
Supekar, K., Musen, M., and Menon, V. (2009). Development of large-scale functional brain
networks in children. PLoS Biol 7, e1000157.

www.intechopen.com

534

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology

Supekar, K., Uddin, L.Q., Prater, K., Amin, H., Greicius, M.D., and Menon, V. Development
of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode network in young
children. Neuroimage 52, 290-301.
Supekar, K., Uddin, L.Q., Prater, K., Amin, H., Greicius, M.D., and Menon, V. (2010).
Development of functional and structural connectivity within the default mode
network in young children. Neuroimage 52, 290-301.
Takahashi, T., Cho, R.Y., Mizuno, T., Kikuchi, M., Murata, T., Takahashi, K., and Wada, Y.
(2010). Antipsychotics reverse abnormal EEG complexity in drug-naive
schizophrenia: a multiscale entropy analysis. Neuroimage 51, 173-182.
Uddin, L.Q., Kelly, A.M., Biswal, B.B., Margulies, D.S., Shehzad, Z., Shaw, D., Ghaffari, M.,
Rotrosen, J., Adler, L.A., Castellanos, F.X., et al. (2008). Network homogeneity
reveals decreased integrity of default-mode network in ADHD. J Neurosci
Methods 169, 249-254.
Uddin, L.Q., Supekar, K., and Menon, V. (2010). Typical and atypical development of
functional human brain networks: insights from resting-state FMRI. Front Syst
Neurosci 4, 21.
Uhlhaas, P.J., Haenschel, C., Nikolic, D., and Singer, W. (2008). The role of oscillations and
synchrony in cortical networks and their putative relevance for the
pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull 34, 927-943.
Van Rie, A., Dow, A., Mupuala, A., and Stewart, P. (2009). Neurodevelopmental trajectory of
HIV-infected children accessing care in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo. J
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr 52, 636-642.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J.P., Rodriguez, E., and Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: phase
synchronization and large-scale integration. Nat Rev Neurosci 2, 229-239.
Wackermann, J., Lehmann, D., Dvorak, I., and Michel, C.M. (1993). Global dimensional
complexity of multi-channel EEG indicates change of human brain functional state
after a single dose of a nootropic drug. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 86,
193-198.
Ward, L.M. (2003). Synchronous neural oscillations and cognitive processes. Trends Cogn
Sci 7, 553-559.
Whittington, M.A. (2008). Can brain rhythms inform on underlying pathology in
schizophrenia? Biol Psychiatry 63, 728-729.
Xie, H.-B., He, W.-X., and Liu, H. (2008). Measuring time series regularity using nonlinear
similarity-based sample entropy. Physics Letters A 372, 7140-7146.
Zavaglia, M., Astolfi, L., Babiloni, F., and Ursino, M. (2008). The effect of connectivity on
EEG rhythms, power spectral density and coherence among coupled neural
populations: analysis with a neural mass model. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 55, 69-77.
Zbilut, J.P., Thomasson, N., and Webber, C.L. (2002). Recurrence quantification analysis as a
tool for nonlinear exploration of nonstationary cardiac signals. Med Eng Phys 24,
53-60.
Zhang, D., Ding, H., Liu, Y., Zhou, C., and Ye, D. (2009). Neurodevelopment in newborns: a
sample entropy analysis of electroencephalogram. Physiol Meas 30, 491-504.

www.intechopen.com

Biomedical Science, Engineering and Technology
Edited by Prof. Dhanjoo N. Ghista

ISBN 978-953-307-471-9
Hard cover, 902 pages
Publisher InTech

Published online 20, January, 2012

Published in print edition January, 2012
This innovative book integrates the disciplines of biomedical science, biomedical engineering, biotechnology,
physiological engineering, and hospital management technology. Herein, Biomedical science covers topics on
disease pathways, models and treatment mechanisms, and the roles of red palm oil and phytomedicinal plants
in reducing HIV and diabetes complications by enhancing antioxidant activity. Biomedical engineering coves
topics of biomaterials (biodegradable polymers and magnetic nanomaterials), coronary stents, contact lenses,
modelling of flows through tubes of varying cross-section, heart rate variability analysis of diabetic neuropathy,
and EEG analysis in brain function assessment. Biotechnology covers the topics of hydrophobic interaction
chromatography, protein scaffolds engineering, liposomes for construction of vaccines, induced pluripotent
stem cells to fix genetic diseases by regenerative approaches, polymeric drug conjugates for improving the
efficacy of anticancer drugs, and genetic modification of animals for agricultural use. Physiological engineering
deals with mathematical modelling of physiological (cardiac, lung ventilation, glucose regulation) systems and
formulation of indices for medical assessment (such as cardiac contractility, lung disease status, and diabetes
risk). Finally, Hospital management science and technology involves the application of both biomedical
engineering and industrial engineering for cost-effective operation of a hospital.

How to reference

In order to correctly reference this scholarly work, feel free to copy and paste the following:
William J. Bosl (2012). Neurotechnology and Psychiatric Biomarkers, Biomedical Science, Engineering and
Technology, Prof. Dhanjoo N. Ghista (Ed.), ISBN: 978-953-307-471-9, InTech, Available from:
http://www.intechopen.com/books/biomedical-science-engineering-and-technology/neurotechnology-andpsychiatric-biomarkers

InTech Europe

University Campus STeP Ri
Slavka Krautzeka 83/A
51000 Rijeka, Croatia
Phone: +385 (51) 770 447
Fax: +385 (51) 686 166
www.intechopen.com

InTech China

Unit 405, Office Block, Hotel Equatorial Shanghai
No.65, Yan An Road (West), Shanghai, 200040, China
Phone: +86-21-62489820
Fax: +86-21-62489821

