ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Year : 2016
Volume : 3
Issue Number : 2
Doi Number : 10.5455/JNBS.1454666348
Article history:
Received 05 February 2016
Received in revised form 15 February 2016
Accepted 02 May 2016

Abstract
Wavelet theory is a widely used feature extraction method for raw electroencephalogram (EEG) signal processing. The nature
of the EEG signal is non-stationary, therefore applying wavelet transform on EEG signals is a valuable process for extraction
promising features. On the other hand, determining the proper wavelet family is a challenging step to get the best fitted features
for high classification accuracy. In this paper, therefore, we focused on a comparative study of different Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT) methods to find the most convenient wavelet function of wavelet families for a non-stationary EEG signal
analysis to be used to classify mental tasks. For the classification process, four different mental tasks were selected to and
we grouped each with another one to set dual tasked sets including all possible combinations. Feature extraction steps are
performed using wavelet functions haar, coiflets (order 1), biorthogonal (order 6.8), reverse biorthogonal (order 6.8), daubechies
(order 2) and, daubechies (order 4). Later, a specific feature reduction formula is applied to the extracted feature vector.
Generated feature vector is then split into train and test data before the classification. Artificial neural network was used for
classification of the extracted feature sets. From the result of the repeated analysis for each DWT methods, Coiflets performed
relatively better compared to other wavelet families.
Keywords: Discrete Wavelet Transform, mental task classification, coiflet wavelet, daubechies wavelet, wavelet families
Özet
Dalgacık dönüşümü, ham EEG (elektroensefalografi) verilerinden öznitelik çıkartma yöntemi olarak yaygın şekilde
kullanılmaktadır. EEG sinyalleri doğası gereği durağan değildir, dolayısıyla dalgacık dönüşümü, sınıflandırma performansına
katkıda bulunacak özniteliklerin çıkartılması sürecinde oldukça etkili bir yöntemdir. Diğer taraftan, uygun dalgacık fonksiyonunun
seçimi de en iyi sınıflandırma performansını elde edebilmek için önem arz etmektedir. Bu sebepten dolayı, bu çalışmada,
ayrık dalgacık dönüşümü yöntemlerinin karşılaştırılması üzerinde durarak, zihinsel görevlerin sınıflandırılmasına ilişkin en iyi
sınıflandırma performansını gösteren dalgacık fonksiyonunu bulmayı amaçladık. Sınıflandırma süreci için dört farklı zihinsel
görev seçildi ve her birinin, diğerleri ile ikili-üçlü kombinasyonları ve tüm durumlara ilişkin karşılaştırılmalı sonuçları elde
edildi. Öznitelik çıkartma aşamalarında sırasıyla, haar, coiflets (seviye 1), biortogonal (seviye 6.8), ters biortogonal (seviye 6.8),
daubechies (seviye 2) ve daubechies (seviye 4) kullanılmıştır. Sonrasında, elde edilen öznitelik kümesine, öznitelik indirgeme
formülü uygulanmış ve elde edilen öznitelik vektörü, eğitim ve test veri kümesi olarak sınıflandırma öncesinde ayrılmıştır.
Çıkartılan öznitelik kümeleri, yapay sinir ağı ile sınıflandırılmıştır. Ayrık dalgacık dönüşümü fonksiyonlarından coiflets’in, diğer
fonksiyonlara göre daha iyi sonuç verdiği gözlenmiştir.
Anahtar Kelimeler: Ayrık dalgacık dönüşümü, zihinsel görev sınıflandırma, coiflet dalgacık, daubechies dalgacık, wavelet fonksiyonları

Corresponding Author: Istanbul Technical University, Graduate School of Science, Engineering and Technology, Department of Mechatronics Engineering,
Istanbul –TURKEY
2
Uskudar University, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Department of Computer Engineering, Istanbul – TURKEY
*1

VOLUME 3 / NUMBER 2 / 2016 THE JOURNAL OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL SCIENCES 59

2016 Published by Üsküdar University

Çağlar Uyulan*1, Türker Tekin Ergüzel2

JNBS

ZİHİNSEL GÖREV SINIFLANDIRMA İÇİN DALGACIK DÖNÜŞÜMÜ
FONKSİYONLARININ KARŞILAŞTIRMASI

www.jnbs.org

COMPARISON OF WAVELET FAMILIES FOR MENTAL TASK
CLASSIFICATION

THE JOURNAL OF
NEUROBEHAVIORAL

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

SCIENCES
NÖRODAVRANIŞ BİLİMLERİ DERGİSİ

1.Introduction

JNBS

2016 Published by Üsküdar University

www.jnbs.org

The wavelet transform were used to be a powerful
and efficient time-frequency analysis method for analyzing
non-stationary signals like EEG. In order to determine
the features in the frequency bands of related potential
recorded by EEG, various methods are used for the
spectral and spatial analysis including Wavelet Filter Bank
(Robinson et al., 2012). Wavelet filter bank decomposes
the transient EEG signal into different frequency bands
and every frequency band is figured out by their scaling
function (Gandhi et al., 2011). By using this method,
the most important step is to choosing a proper wavelet
family including the mother wavelet function for signal
characterization. It is also important to decide the optimal
wavelets and the appropriate number of decomposition
levels (Sonia et al.,2013).
A set of features, which contain sequence of wavelet
coefficient vectors can be obtained after this process,
which decomposes the signal into its wavelets at the
specific sub-band frequencies. By using this method,
called as feature extraction, the discrimination of the
mental tasks becomes applicable. The dimension of the
extracted features should also be reduced and made in
compact form. The reduced feature vectors are evaluated
as the inputs to the classification stage. In this study,
an artificial neural network (ANN) with back propagation
algorithm was employed. In order to acquire a satisfactory
classification performance, the design process and
parameters such as the number of neurons in each layer
and the number of layers, of the classifier is important
to be taken into consideration. The main objective of
this paper is determining the most appropriate wavelet
function to extract features from raw EEG signals for
mental task classification combining a learning algorithm
to be able to make classification prediction. The outline
of this study is as follows; in section 2.1, we will explain
about the experimental system for data collection and
filtering stage. In section 2.2, the theory and application
of feature extraction method used is reviewed followed by
the concepts of discrete wavelet transforms. In section
2.3, the theoretical basis of the wavelet mother functions
of DWT are explained in details. In section 2.4, the
classification stage using ANN is described. The analysis
of the experiments done and results obtained in Section 3
and conclusions are given in the last section.

2.Material and Methods
2.1. Data Acquisition and Preprocessing Stage
All training and testing data were collected from
a healthy subject, 28 year old male. The subject focused
on each mental task for 10 consecutive seconds. The
sampling time of the neuroheadset is 128 samples/second
for all channels. 40 different epochs were assigned for
training and 10 epochs were used for test data collection.
Therefore, we had in total 1600 train and 400 test dataset
matrix in association with 4 mental tasks for each 14
sensor channels respectively. After performing the feature
extraction process, a valuable reduced feature is evaluated.
The dimension of the input training matrix and input test
matrix for each feature was set as 14x1600 and 14x400

before the training process. Here, we propose a discrete
wavelet transform based feature extraction method by
using various wavelet mother functions to investigate the
dominant frequency band and timing in EEG signals and
compare with each other functions classification accuracy
for all combinations of 2 mental task groups of 4 predefined mental tasks which are; a) Reciting the alphabet
backwards, b) Imagination of rotation of a cube, c)
Imagination of left arm movements (open/close) and d)
Mentally performing mathematical operation. All dataset
were collected from the Emotive EPOC Neuroheadset that
it is available to save the EEG signals from 14 channels
of the Emotiv-Headset (AF3-F7-F3-FC5-T7-P7-O1-O2P8-T8-FC6-F4-F8-AF4). The headset samples from all
channels at 128 samples/second. The EEG signals were
filtered with band pass filter between 0.5 and 45 Hz.
using a 6th order butterworth band pass filter to remove
the artifacts.
2.2.Discrete Wavelet Transform
The wavelet term indicates to a wave based window
function of the main frequency f 0 . The wavelets are
classified with its wavelet window. The continuous wavelet
transform is given as:

Wc  ,   

1





t  
 dt
 

 x t  t  



()

where ψ t refers to the mother wavelet function, the
factor

1

, normalizes the energy of the signal.

µ

The scale factor µ is the inverse of frequency. If this
scaling factor has a small value, the wavelet corresponds
to high frequencies of the EEG signal. If this scaling factor
is larger, then the wavelet is expanded and refers to low
frequencies. τ is the translation factor and corresponds
to the position of the center of window while it is shifted
by the signal (Tobin, 2007).
The CWT is inefficient for ANN classification, because of
the generation of redundant information. For this reason,
discrete wavelet transform (DWT) was used which is
implemented using sub-band coding method as filter bank
(Kannan et al., 1996). The multi-rate filter bank has a
series of high-pass and low-pass FIR filter and decimation
factors are shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Filter bank representation up to seventh level.

60 THE JOURNAL OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL SCIENCES VOLUME 3 / NUMBER 2 / 2016

Wd ( j, k )   x  k 2
j

j

2

k

  2 j n  k 

In DWT, the original signal passes through two
complementary filters, named low-pass and high-pass
filters, and emerges as two signals, called approximation
coefficients and detail coefficients (Weeks, 2010). DWT
is convenient for processing signals like EEG, since it is
very effective in time-frequency localization and multiscale resolution (Sonia et al., 2013). The low frequency
components, h[n] “approximations” are most important
than high frequency components, g[n] “detail” in
characterizing EEG signals. The consecutive low and high
pass filtering can be evaluated by the following equations:

Yhigh [k ]   x[n]g[2k  n]
n

Ylow[k ]   x[n]h[2k  n]

parallel processor composed of simple processing units in
order to deal with uncertain, fuzzy data sets. Each neuron
acquires a weighted input vector or matrix and produces
an output vector (Freeman, 2006). Multi-Layer Perceptron
NN supported by back-propagation training algorithm are
very convenient for brain computer interface (BCI) and
pattern recognition applications. MLP’s are designed with
an input, one or more hidden and an output layer. Multilayer feed forward NN was applied to our data set for
the classification process. The weights on the network are
adjusted applying deeply training, the error is minimized
based on the gradient descent algorithm. Hereafter the NN
was tested with the test dataset by means of performance
criteria. After making some heuristic trials, we have set
the optimal configuration for the NN parameters as;
number of hidden layers (1 or 2), number of neurons in
each layer (50) and the maximum number of iterations in
the learning process (1000), the learning rate 0.035, the
momentum rate 0.2, performance criteria “mse”, training
algorithm “scaled conjugate gradient”.
2.4 Explanation of DWT Basis Functions

n

Unfolding the information, localized within the signal, is
based upon the structural basis function. The information
hidden in the signal can be obtained through dilation and
shifting procedure. It is essential to select the correct and
efficient wavelet function for specific applications. In this
paper, we explain a frequently used DWT basis function
analysis (Kuzu et al., 2013). The scale and mother wavelet
functions of the haar, daubechies-2, daubechies-4,
coiflets-1, biorthogonal-6.8, reverse biorthogonal-6.8 are
depicted in Figure 3, respectively.

JNBS

Where, Yhigh and Ylow are the outputs of high pass and
low pass filters respectively. The filters have a function
of sub-sampling the input signal by 2. DWT has varying
window size at low and high frequencies, which scans
both spatial and spectral domains in order to resolve
all frequencies optimally (Mallat, 2008). The wavelet
coefficients (or scales) displayed in Figure 2 is in expanded
time format. This is difficult format to interpret from a
time-frequency point of view since both are embedded in
the display. Each of the levels are concatenated in time
and displayed as amplitude versus time. Applying the
DWT to EEG signals yields the frequency spectrum for
each sub-band.

2016 Published by Üsküdar University

The discrete wavelet transform is defined by the following
equation (Mallat, 2008).

www.jnbs.org

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Figure 2: DWT coefficients in time format

  

     

i  sqrt abs sum diff fft i

Here, λi denotes the node vector, which is the output of
the i.th level low-pass filter and β i is the specific feature
for this level.
2.3.Neural Network Classifier
A neural network contains highly interconnected, complex
nodes in order to model biological neurons. It works as a
VOLUME 3 / NUMBER 2 / 2016 THE JOURNAL OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL SCIENCES 61

THE JOURNAL OF
NEUROBEHAVIORAL

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

SCIENCES
NÖRODAVRANIŞ BİLİMLERİ DERGİSİ

2 N 1

m

  t   2   1 h2 N 1m  2t  m 
m 0

2 N 1

 (t )  2  hm  2t  m 
m 0

Where h0 , h1 , h2 ,..., h2 N −1 are the constant coefficients of
the filter.
2.4.3.Coiflets

JNBS

2016 Published by Üsküdar University

www.jnbs.org

Coiflet wavelet function and its scaling function have
2N and 2N-1 moments equal to 0, respectively. The
two functions have a support of length 6N-1. The main
indicative feature of coiflet wavelet is to have highest
number of vanishing moments for both scaling and
wavelet function for any given support width (Majumdar
et al., 2013). The approximation properties depend on
the number of vanishing wavelet moments (Cerna et al.,
2008). Let Pk f be an approximation of f ∈ L2 ! on
level k.

( )

Figure 3: Wavelet shapes of different wavelet functions and their
scale functions

Pk f   f , k ,q k ,q
q¢

and for J < k

2.4.1.Haar
Haar wavelet is a row of rescaled “square-shaped”
functions. Take that φ t is a scaling function (Daniel,
1994; Stoloescu et al., 2010).

()

1  0  t  1
0  otherwise

 t   

The haar mother wavelet function can be obtained by the
following function:

where

l

l ,q  2 2   2l.  q 
l

 l ,q  2 2  2l.  q 
The wavelet coefficients are evaluated by following
formula:
l

f , l ,q   f  t 2 2  2l t  q  dt




2.4.4.Biorthogonal
Haar wavelet is orthogonal to its own translations and
dilations and not continuous.
2.4.2.Daubechies
Daubechies wavelets are similar to the haar wavelet
transform by evaluating the averages and difference
through the scalar production with scaling and wavelets
(Mohammed et al., 2009). The orthonormal wavelets are
established with arbitrary number N of vanishing wavelet
moments and minimal length of support 2N-1 (Cerna et
al., 2008). Daubechies wavelet can be evaluated by using
following mother and scaling functions:

Two wavelets are used for decomposition and
reconstruction. Biorthogonal wavelets are not based on
vahishing moment and all wavelets referred to its family
have a symmetric structure. For orthogonal wavelets, the
scaling function and mother wavelet are presented by the
recursive relationship (Fritz, 1994).

 t   2  g m  2t  k 
m

 t   2  hm  2t  m 

62 THE JOURNAL OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL SCIENCES VOLUME 3 / NUMBER 2 / 2016

m

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

n

n

 mn (t )  2 2  2n t  m 
2.4.5.Reverse biorthogonal
Reverse biorthogonal wavelet family is obtained from
the biorthogonal wavelet coupled. Reverse biorthogonal
wavelet families are guided by biorthogonal spline
wavelets, therefore the symmetrical condition and
reconstruction can be assured (Varuneshkumar et al.,
2015).

3.Results and Discussion
Feature vectors were created from the extracted nodes
of decomposed wavelet coefficients of EEG signals at the
7th level. Our approach is to find out a proper mother
wavelet function based on extracted feature set to get
satisfactory classification accuracy. We investigated the
effect of various wavelet functions whose filter lengths are
different from each other. The EEG signals collected for 4
mental tasks were decomposed into coarse approximation
and detailed information. DWT employs its set of scaling
functions and wavelet functions, which are associated
with low-pass and high-pass filters respectively.
The
EEG signals collected from each electrode channel were
decomposed up the 7th level in the case of wavelet filter
bank decomposition. Extracted feature vectors from both
the methods were fed into the ANN for classification step.
We divided the feature vector set into three sets, 70% of
which is the data is used for training, 15% for validation
and 15% for the testing processes respectively. ANN uses
one input layer, one hidden layer and one output layer.
Working with this network structure, the feature vector
set obtained were first trained and then their performance
were tested accordingly. The corresponding accuracies of
each mental task were evaluated after testing processes.
The classification performance results obtained using
DWT for different wavelet functions are listed in table 1.

Table 1: The classification accuracies obtained for

4 mental task subsets by using different wavelet basis
function as feature extraction method on test data
Mother
Wavelet
Class
Alphabet-Cube
Alphabet-LeftArm
Alphabet-MathOp
Cube-LeftArm
Cube-MathOp
LeftArm-MathOp
Alphabet-CubeLeftArm-MathOp

hear

coiflets 1

biorthogonal
6.8

reverse
biorthogonal
6.8

db2

db4

91.4%
60.3%
62.5%
90.3%
91.0%
73.0%
77.5%

99.6%
64.2%
68.2%
98.5%
99.7%
80.0%
85.3%

95.6%
61.1%
65.1%
94.3%
95.3%
76.5%
81.5%

95.4%
61.0%
65.4%
94.1%
95.2%
76.4%
81.2%

97.8%
62.5%
67.0%
96.5%
97.5%
78.3%
83.2%

99.4%
63.5%
68.0%
98.0%
99.3%
79.6%
84.5%

Since there are different mother wavelets of different
wavelet families available, the choice of the wavelet
family and the mother wavelet plays an important role
in terms of classification accuracies. The results clearly

underline that coiflets1 type of mother wavelet performs
better than the other members of its wavelet family
with its 85.3% classification performance for 4 mental
task classification and higher accuracies for all other
dual task classifications. Dual task performance of the
proposed methods verifies the better performance of
coiflet1. Besides it is also possible to deduce that, the
performance of each method is good enough to work on.
For the following studies, especially real time BCI design,
real time response is crucially important and the response
time is to be considered and has much more importance.

4. Conclusion
In this paper, a comparative study of wavelet based
feature extraction methods such as discrete wavelet
transform based wavelet filter bank decomposition are
performed. These methods are combined with neural
networks for classification purpose. The performance of
both these techniques are tested and evaluated. Both
the techniques are found to be efficient in EEG signal
processing. The most suitable mother wavelet for feature
extraction and classification of EEG signals was found.
The features were extracted from the 4 different mental
task performed after the decomposition by each of the
wavelet family and ANN was employed to classify the
cases. Based on the classification accuracy rate obtained,
it was found that Coiflet of order 1 mother wavelet
function, whose general classification performance for
4 mental tasks is 85.3%, is the best wavelet family for
analysis of EEG signal. The computational complexity
and the feature vector size were also reduced by using
DWT. Provided that the experimental results done, a
wavelet transform is an elegant tool for the analysis of
non-stationary signals like EEG. The experimental results
show that this hybrid architecture using DWT and ANN
could effectively extract the features from the EEG signal
for various applications. Coiflets1 as a feature extraction
method achieve higher classification accuracy compared
to other wavelet functions.

References
Cerna D., Finek V., Nazjar K., (2008). On the exact values of
coefficients of coiflets, Central European Journal of Mathematics
6(1) pp. 159-169.
Daniel T.L., Akio Y., (1994). Wavelet Analysis: Theory and
Applications, Hewlett Packard Journal.
Freeman J.A., Skapura D.M., (2006). Neural Networks Algorithm
Application and Programming Techniques, Pearson Education.
Fritz Keinert, (1994) Biorthogonal Wavelets for Fast Matrix
Computations, Applied and Computational Harmonic Analysis, Vol
1, Issue 2, Pages 147-156,
Gandhi T., Panigrahi B.K., Ananad S., (2011). A comparative
study of wavelet families for EEG signals classification,
Neurocomputing, 74, 3051-3057.
Kannan R., Vetterli M., Herley C., (1996). Wavelets, Subband
Coding, and Best Basis, proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 84, No. 4.
Kuzu A., Baran, E.A., Bogosyan S., Gokasan M., Sabanovic A.,
(2013). WPT based compression for bilateral control,” in Industrial
Electronics Society, IECON 2013 - 39th Annual Conference of the
IEEE , pp.5686-5691.

VOLUME 3 / NUMBER 2 / 2016 THE JOURNAL OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL SCIENCES 63

www.jnbs.org

2

2016 Published by Üsküdar University

n

 t   2   2 t  m 
n
m

JNBS

Their scaled translates are denoted by;

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

THE JOURNAL OF
NEUROBEHAVIORAL

SCIENCES
NÖRODAVRANIŞ BİLİMLERİ DERGİSİ

Majumdar. S., Dixit. A. (2013). Comparative Analysis of Coiflet and
Daubechies Wavelets Using Global Threshold For Image Noising,
International Journal of Advances in Engineering&Technology.
Mallat S., (2008). A Wavelet Tour of Signal Processing 3rd ed..
Academic Press.
Mohammed A.S., Nivin G., Beate M., (2009). Daubechies Versus
Biorthogonal Wavelet for Moving Object Detection in Traffic
Monitoring Systems, http://edoc.hu-berlin.de/series/informatikberichte.
Robinson, N., Vinod, A.P., Cuntai Guan, (2012). A modified
Wavelet-Common Spatial Pattern method for decoding hand
movement directions in brain computer interfaces, in Neural
Networks (IJCNN), The 2012 International Joint Conference on.
Sonia S., David P.S., Poulose J., (2013). A Comparative Study
of Wavelet Based Feature Extraction Techniques in Recognizing
Isolated Spoken Words, International Journal of Signal Processing
Systems.

www.jnbs.org

Tobin P., (2007), PSpice for Digital Signal Processing, Morgan
& Claypool.

2016 Published by Üsküdar University

Stolojescu C., Railean I., Moga S., Isar A., (2010). Comparison
of wavelet families with application to WiMAX traffic forecasting,
in Optimization of Electrical and Electronic Equipment (OPTIM),
12th International Conference on, pp.932-937.

Weeks M., (2010). Digital Signal Processing Using MATLAB &
Wavelets, 2nd. Edition, Jones and Barlett Publishers Inc.

JNBS

Varuneshkumar,
M., Anil K., and Jaiswal A.K., (2015).
Performance Comparison of Daubechies, Biorthogonal and Haar
Transform for Grayscale Image Compression. International
Journal of Computer Applications 126(9):40-42.

64 THE JOURNAL OF NEUROBEHAVIORAL SCIENCES VOLUME 3 / NUMBER 2 / 2016

