ORIENTAL JOURNAL OF
COMPUTER SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
An International Open Free Access, Peer Reviewed Research Journal
Published By: Oriental Scientific Publishing Co., India.

ISSN: 0974-6471
December 2016,
Vol. 9, No. (3):
Pgs. 194-203

www.computerscijournal.org

Analysis of the Effect of Cell Phone Radiation
on the Human Brain Using Electroencephalogram
Humaira Nisar* and Hamara M. Awadh
Department of Electronic Engineering Faculty of Engineering and Green
Technology Universiti Tunku Abdul Rahman, Malaysia.
*Corresponding author E-mail: humaira@utar.edu.my
http://dx.doi.org/10.13005/ojcst/09.03.05
Received: March 16, 2016; Accepted: May 20, 2016)
Abstract
This paper aims to investigate the effect of cell phone radiation on human brain. It is known
that the cell phone emits electromagnetic (EM) radiation which could be harmful to the human brain.
In this research the electroencephalogram (EEG) signal has been acquired from 24 healthy subjects
using a 16 channel EEG headset under different experimental conditions. The signal is decomposed
into different brain rhythms using Daubechies Discrete Wavelet Transform up to 5th-level of the
decomposition. Quantitative analysis has been carried out using two statistical parameters (Energy,
Entropy) and Absolute Power. Special attention was focused on Temporal and Frontal lobes as these
are near to the ear. Experimental results show higher values (for energy, entropy and absolute power)
in the low-frequency bands (delta and theta) compared to the high frequency bands (alpha, beta and
gamma) in both lobes. When the phone was placed 5cm away from the head there was less brain
activation compared to when the cell phone was placed next to the ear/head on both sides. It was
found that there was more effect on the right side compared to the left side from the cell phone’s
radio waves.

Keywords: EEG; activation; Radio frequency; cell phone, Wavelet Transform, Entropy.

Introduction
The rapid evolution of the cell phone
technology has resulted in a drastic increase in
cell phone usage globally with an estimated 4.77
billion subscribers in 2017. The radio frequency
(RF) used for communication by cell phone can
penetrate through semi-solid substances, like living
tissue to an effective distance proportional to its

power density. According to Adey1, biophysical and
physical studies demonstrate that sensitivity to very
low RF fields have no direct or indirect relationship
to cell or tissue heating. In 1999 Peyman and
Chen2 argued that if there are any adverse effects
on the human brain, then it may be due to the nonthermal effect rather than the thermal effect. Recent
research has demonstrated the short term effect of
EM waves on the human brain, however, there is

195

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)

little or no evidence of the direct or indirect long term
effect. Corle et al argue in [3] that although there is
an increase in the number of reported brain tumors
in the US, the cause is yet to be determined. Despite
all this, scientists still believe that prolonged usage
of cellular phone has potential adverse biological
effects on the human health. Based on current
statistics, mostly teenagers and children are the
main victims of EM radiation. Children exposed to
RF radiation at 1800 MHz may have complications
in the hypothalamus, cortical, hippocampus region
and the eyes. Further studies have found that EM
radiation penetrates deeper in a 5 year-old child’s
scalp than a 10 year-old and the lowest in an
adult3.
Many studies have been carried out to
understand or identify the risk of brain cancer from
cell phone use. According to Morgan 4, a large
portion of the cost of most of the ongoing studies is
paid by the cell phone industry itself, hence there is
a possibility of poor study designs to favor the cell
phone industry’s image. In another study conducted
by Kwon, et al., 13 healthy young males (aged 21
to 29 years and right-handed) s were ON and OFF
exposed to a cellular phone (Nokia 6110 Espoo,
902.4 MHz GSM) radio frequency waves to the right
side of the head for a period of 30 minutes5. During
the experiment, subjects were asked to perform a
simple visual task of identifying the 2 cm-diameter
circles of four different colors displayed on a monitor
screen placed 1 m away for 0.5 seconds in a random
order at random intervals of 2 to 5 seconds. Kwon,
et al. (2011) concluded that, there was effect of
the short-term GSM radiation on brain glucose
metabolism in anterior and posterior parts of the
right temporal cortex. In another experiment carried
out by Maby, et al., two categories of 9 healthy
and 6 epileptic patients were exposed to GSM
mobile phone radiation6. He found that there was a
change in alpha brain wave activity in both healthy
and epileptic patients during the GSM mobile
phone radiation exposure. In a study conducted

by Tingolfa7, 24 healthy participants were exposed
to cell phone radiation. It was found that there the
brain electrical activity increases with the decrease
in distance of the cell phone from the head. Tingolfa
also found that the level of interference of the brain
activity from the cell phone radiation is more on the
right side.
In the following paragraphs we will give a
brief overview of EM radiation, brain anatomy and
EEG to understand this investigation. Cell phones
transmit low RF power with operational frequencies
in the range 450 – 2700MHz and peak powers
of about 1–2 Watts. The peak power is highest
around the cell phone’s antenna and decreases
with increasing distance. It is also agreed that,
cell phone usage in an area with good reception
reduces exposure. In bad reception area, the cell
phone transmits high power to stay connected with
the nearest base tower to sustain a call. Therefore,
more RF energy is emitted hence an increase in
the amount of exposure is expected.
The brain is one of the most important
organs of the body that coordinates all the
activities. It is divided into three major parts
namely: Cerebrum, Cerebellum, brain stem and
diencephalon. Cerebrum is the largest part of the
brain. It covers the diencephalon and is divided
into right and left hemisphere longitudinally. Each
hemisphere is subdivided into brain lobes, named
as: Frontal lobe, Parietal lobe, Temporal lobe and
Occipital lobe. Teach lobe has its individual role.
[8]. Frontal lobe takes care of parts of speech and
movement, reasoning and emotions. The Parietal
lobe deals with perception of stimuli in connection
with temperature, pain and touch. The Temporal
lobe takes care of hearing and memory. Finally
the Occipital lobe deals with human vision. The
brain signals are classified into frequency bands
or brain rhythms, these are delta band (0.5 – 4Hz),
theta band (4 – 8Hz), alpha band (8 – 13Hz), beta
band (13 - 30Hz) and gamma band (30 – 42Hz).

Fig. 1: Flow chart of the methodology

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)
The different brain bands represent different brain
activities and characteristics. The communication
within the brain is done by special messengers
called neurons. EEG is the measure or recording
of the brain’s spontaneous electrical activity along
the scalp. The brain consists of billions of neurons.
These neurons fire randomly whenever a stimuli or a
message is detected. The activities are represented
as small electric voltage fields.
In order to carry out the analysis on the
potential effect of cell phone usage on human
brain, the brain rhythms of 24 healthy volunteers
were recorded before, during and after cell phone
usage for six distinct conditions. A quantitative
analysis was carried out based on three statistical
parameters (Entropy, and Standard Deviation)
using Daubechies Discrete Wavelet Transform up
to 5th-level of the decomposition in the frequency
domain. Lastly, the Absolute Power was also
calculated to correlate the results. The rest of the
paper is organized as follows. In section III we will
discuss the experimental setup for data acquisition.
In section III, we will discuss the methodology for
signal decomposition and quantitative analysis. In
section IV, we will present experimental results and
discussion on the results. Finally the paper will be
concluded in section V, followed by references.
Experiment Setup for Data Acquisition
Pre-recorded artifact free EEG data using
16-channel EEG head set from Emotiv Systems is
used. Data is collected from 24 healthy participants.
EEGLAB and Matrix Laboratory (MATLAB), is used
for analysis. The data had been recorded for six
conditions for 5 minutes each. After each recording
the participants were given a 5 minute break. The
experimental procedure is described as follows:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

196

Before cell phone use: In relaxed mood with
eyes open (A)
With cell phone: Left ear with no gap (B)
With cell phone: Left ear with a 5cm gap
(C)
With cell phone: Right ear with no gap (D)
With cell phone: Right ear with a 5cm gap
(E)
After cell phone use: In relaxed mood with
eyes open (F)
Methodology

The project flow is as shown in Figure 1
below. The EEG data is acquired from 24 healthy
participants. The data is processed by eliminating
any artifacts present in the data manually and by
using Independent Component Analysis (ICA) using
EEGLAB. The artifact-free data is then analyzed
in the frequency domain using Wavelet Transform
using MATLAB environment.
EEG signal is decomposed using wavelet
transform into different frequency bands.Wavelet
transform can be categorized into three main
categories; Continuous Wavelet Transform (CWT),
Discrete Wavelet Transform and the Wavelet Packet.
In DWT, a signal is sent through a string of filters.
The signal is first sent through a pair of highpass and low-pass filters where convolution and
decomposition are performed simultaneously. The
output from the low-pass filter (Xlow) is called the
approximation coefficient while the output from the
high-pass filter (Xhigh) is called the detail coefficient
as shown in Equations (1) and (2).

...(1)

h[n]
x[n]

m[n
]

2
2

Detail

coefficients (D)
Approximation
coefficients (A)

Fig. 2: Block diagram of a single
level filter analysis

...(2)
Both Xlow and Xhigh outputs contain only
half of the original signal’s frequencies since their
time resolution is halved. This makes both outputs
not able to meet the Nyquist criteria (fmax>= fs/2).
In order to make them meet the Nyquist rule, Xlow
and Xhigh decimated or sub-sampled by a factor of

197

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)

two. This is shown in Fig. 2 for a single level wavelet
analysis. For a multi-level wavelet analysis, the
same procedure is repeated N (number of levels)
times generating N detailed coefficients (D) and N
approximation coefficients (A).
EEG signals are non-stationary signals,
which means different frequency components are
only present for unknown time periods in a given
brain signal. Fourier Transform cannot describe
it fully since it only involves stationary sinusoids.
Wavelet transform [9] is a strong analytical tool for
the non-Stationary signal analysis. It breaks down
the EEG signal into different brain frequency bands
(delta, theta, alpha, beta and gamma). In this work
we have chosen the Daubechies Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT, db2). The Daubechies is one of
the most commonly used wavelet family by most
researchers in EEG analysis. In this work we choose
5-level DWT (db2 and levels, l=5) for the analysis.
To determine the number of levels required in a
wavelet analysis for a certain signal, the sampling
frequency of that signal is considered. This is
because the splitting point of the decomposition is
usually half the signals sampling frequency (fs/2
or Nyquist frequency). In the current study, our
sampling frequency is fs =128 Hz.
Two statistical parameters, Energy
and Entropy were computed for the EEG signal
frequency bands (gamma, beta, alpha, theta and
delta). The parameters were calculated for all lobes.
Energy is used to determine the energy distribution
in an EEG signal. It explains the signal strength
since it gives the area under the curve of power at
all intervals of time. An increase in signal energy
indicates the increase in brain activation. The EEG
signal energy is given by Equation (3):

...(3)
Entropy is a measure of irregularity in
signal. EEG signals are regular when there are less
brain activities and may be irregular in the presence
of radiation from mobile phone. The entropy of EEG
signal is given by Equation (4):

...(4)
where D is an EEG detailed signal
produced by wavelet transform.
Results and discussion
In this section we will discuss the change
in brain activation observed using two statistical
features (Energy and Entropy) and Power in different
brain rhythms across the frontal and temporal lobes
for six conditions for every subject.
The total energy for each condition in
each frequency band and in each lobe (frontal and
temporal) was calculated. The average total energy
of the each brain frequency band in the temporal
and frontal lobes is plotted for the six conditions
In Figures 3 and 4. In general higher total energy
values were recorded in the right ear than the left
ear in all bands and in both lobes except in delta
and theta band in the temporal region where left
temporal lobe has higher activation for the case
without distance. Higher total energy values were
recorded when the cell phone was placed with the
ear (without distance) during phone use compared
to when the cell phone was placed at a distance
from the ear (5cm away from ear) in all wave bands
in both lobes.
Entropy is a measure of irregularity in an
EEG signal. The Entropy value for each condition
in each frequency band in each lobe (frontal and
temporal) was calculated. The normalized entropy,
in relation to condition 1 (before exposure) is shown
in Figures 5 and 6. In general higher total entrpoy
values were recorded in the right ear than the left
ear in all bands and in both lobes except in delta
and theta band in the temporal region where left
temporal lobe has higher activation for the case
without distance. Higher total entropy values were
recorded when the cell phone was placed with the
ear (without distance) during phone use compared
to when the cell phone was placed at a distance
from the ear (5cm away from ear) in all wave bands
in both lobes.

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)

Fig. 3 Results of Energy in Temporal Lobe for
different brain rhythms

198

Fig. 4: Results of Energy in Frontal Lobe for
different brain rhythms

199

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)

Fig. 5: Results of Entropy in Temporal Lobe
for different brain rhythms

Fig. 6: Results of Entropy in Frontal Lobe for
different brain rhythms

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)

Fig. 7: Results of Absolute Power in Temporal
Lobe for different brain rhythms

200

Fig. 8: Results of Absolute Power in Frontal
Lobe for different brain rhythms

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)
A significant increase in signal entropy
after cell phone use (the 6thCondition) was also
recorded in theta, alpha, beta and gamma bands
in both temporal and frontal lobes (Figure 5 and
6). This may suggest that the effect of cell phone
radiation on these brain rhythms can last for some
time even after exposure is over. Zandi, et al.,
reported that there is a fixed latency of about 15
minutes from the time of exposure to the time of
observational changes in the EEG activities10. This
may also explain the peak activity-values observed
in the 6th Condition (after exposure) where EEG
readings were recorded 5minutes after the subject
put down the phone.
Power is defined as the amount of total
signal energy per unit time. The absolute power
is generally expressed relative to baseline power
level. In this work, the frequency-band powers, in
relation to 1st Condition (before exposure) as the
reference, were computed and expressed as the
absolute power ratios of the EEG signals. The power
ratios are plotted shown in Figure 7 and 8.
	Higher absolute power values are
recorded in the right ear than the left ear in all bands
and in both lobes, except delta-Temporal, thetaTemporal and alpha-Temporal and delta-Frontal
bands. Higher absolute power values were recorded
when the cell phone was placed next to the the ear
(without distance) during phone use compared to
when the cell phone was placed at a distance from
the ear (5cm away from ear) in all bands and in both
lobes. The absolute power findings are almost inline
with our findings with Energy and Entropy.
In this work we have found that higher
feature values (energy, entropy and absolute
power) have been recorded in the low-frequency
bands (delta and theta) compared to the high
frequency bands (alpha,beta and gamma) in
both lobes. Overall, the delta band has shown the
highest values in this study. Delta waves are the
most basic in a relaxed person’s brain signal and
they carry the most signal energy due to their high
amplitudes and slow-frequency. Several studies
of brain waves have reported that delta and theta
waves increase with sleep in normal human adults
and decrease in a wakeful brain state. However, in
this study we found there were increase in delta and

201

theta wave energy and entropy during cell phone
use (during a wakeful brain state). Since the high
increase in energy and entropy values in the low
frequency bands indicates the presence of delta
and theta waves in large percentage in a wakeful
state, this primarily suggests an interference of
the brain normal activity by the cell phone’s radio
waves which are emitted closely to the head during
ordinary cell phone use.
In this study, it has also been found
that cell phone use with a distance of 5cm (in
the current study) has less effect compared to
without a distance at both the left and right ears.
When the phone was placed 5cm away from the
head there were less brain activities compared to
more activities when the cell phone was placed
right against the ear in both sides. These findings
indicate that a cell phone’s RF radiation is highest
around the cell phone’s antenna and decreases with
increasing distance. Hence, the amount of induced
brain activity decreases with distance during phone
use.
In this study the right ear without distance
has shown a typical dominant and consistent trend
of having the highest signal energy and entropy
values followed by the left ear without distance.
However, with the exception of delta-Temporal
and theta-Temporal which have highest values at
the left ear without distance. Sekimoto, et al. argue
that in a normal adult’s brain at rest, delta waves
have a higher count of dominance in the righthemisphere (frontal and central lobes) than in the
left-hemisphere [11]. This high dominance of delta
waves in the right-hemisphere compared to the lefthemisphere supports our findings of the right-ear
without distance showing the highest brain activity
(delta-Frontal) during cell phone use.
A higher dominance of delta waves in
the left-hemisphere (temporal) mainly suggests
a brain confusion or a serious brain disorder like
schizophrenia. However this is a very preliminary
study and we cannot conclude that what is the
exact reason for this observation. However it may
be due to the brain’s exposure to cell phone’s radio
waves that leads to the abnormal sharp spike of
delta-Temporal in the left-hemisphere.

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)
The presence of large counts of delta and
theta waves in a wakeful state (as found in this
study) is just abnormal and may result in decrease in
brain concentration or may lead to brain confusion.
Hence, this also supports the various reports from
previous studies of anxiety and headaches after
a phone call . It is also important to note that the
low-frequency radio waves emitted by the cell phone
are more likely to interfere with the low-frequency
components of a brain signal rather than with the
high-frequency components. This may also explain
why there are significant amount of activities in the
delta band compared to the rest of the bands.
	Higher energy values were recorded
before exposure because the subjects were more
excited at the beginning of the experiment but with
time they got used to experimenting environment
and were able to achieve a relaxed brain state.
Based on this study, significant changes in entropy
and energy values were recorded in the alpha
band. Alpha waves are the dominant wave patterns
of a normal adult in a wakeful and relaxed state
with eyes closed. Typically, alpha waves decrease
in amplitude when eyes opened. Therefore, the
findings in this study of increased alpha energy,
entropy and standard deviation during cell phone
use (eyes opened) clearly indicates the presence
of abnormal brain activities induced or triggered in
the alpha band during the process.
conclusion
An analysis for effect of cell phone
radiation on the human brain was carried out
in the frequency domain. The EEG signal was
decomposed into various frequency bands by
using Daubechies Discrete Wavelet Transform.
In the feature extraction, entropy, and energy of
the transformed signals were calculated and their
average values plotted for temporal and frontal

202

lobes. These are the lobes nearest to the ear and
hence get most exposure during cell phone use. It
was found that higher signal energy and entropy
values were recorded during cell phone use without
distance than with a distance of 5cm. Hence there
is more risk of radiation effect on the brain when
the cell phone is placed next to the ear than when
holding it at a distance from the ear. This is because
a cell phone’s RF radiation is highest around the
cell phone’s antenna and decreases with increasing
distance.
Typical alpha waves decrease in amplitude
with eyes opened and increase when eyes closed
and at a relaxed brain state. Contrary to that, in
this study, there were increase in alpha energy
and entropy with eyes open. Therefore, this clearly
indicates the presence of brain activities induced or
triggered in the alpha band during cell phone use.
The delta energy and entropy are higher in temporal
lobe (delta-temporal) at left-ear without distance
than at right-ear without distance in this study. In this
work, low-frequency bands (delta, theta and alpha)
have consistently recorded highest values in most
cases compared to the high-frequency bands (beta
and gamma). Additionally, from all the findings, it
can be concluded that delta, theta and alpha bands
have more effect from the cell phone radiation than
the rest of the bands.
In conclusion we can say that there is
slightly higher effect on the right-ear compared to
the left-ear from the cell phone’s radio waves. This
may be due to the high dominant delta waves in the
right-hemisphere (frontal and central lobes) than in
the left-hemisphere as argued by Sekimoto, et al10.
Also this is why the frontal lobe recorded higher
overall delta energy and entropy values compared
to the corresponding delta band in the temporal lobe
with only one spike of peak values at the left-ear
without distance.

References

1.

Adey, W. Interaction Mechanism of Low Level
Electromagnetic Fields in Living Systems.
Collective Properties of Cell Membrane, pp.
47-77, (1977).

2.

Peyman, A. & Chen, X. Electromagnetic
Assessment and Antenna Design Relating
to Health Implication of Mobile Phone. The
feasibility of using medical imaging modalities

Nisar & Awadh, Orient. J. Comp. Sci. & Technol., Vol. 9(3), 194-203 (2016)

3.

4.

5.

6.

for in-vivo detecting of physiological effects
of electromagnetic radiation in the human
brain during the use of cellular phones, pp.
3/1-3/6 (1999).
Corle, C., Makale, M. & Kesari, S. Cell
phones and glioma risk: a review of the
evidence. 106(1), pp. 1-13 (2012).
Morgan, L. Powerwatch. [Online] Available
at:http://www.powerwatch.org.uk/columns/
morgan/20080108_interphone_design.
asp[Accessed 11 July 2014] (2014).
Kwon, M. S. et al. GSM mobile phone
radiation suppresses brain glucose
metabolism. Journal of Cerebral Blood
Flow & Metabolism, 31(12), p. 2293-2301
(2011).
Maby, E., es, R. L. B. J. & Faucon, G.
Short-term effects of GSM mobiles phones
on spectral components of the human
electroencephalogram.New York City, IEEE
(2006).

7.

203

Tingolfa, T. Analysis of the Side Effects of
Cell Phone on the Brain Using EEG, Tronor,
Perak: Universiti Tecknologi PETRONAS
(2013).
8.	Humaira Nisar, Yeap Kim Ho, “Introduction to
EEG and ERP Signals,” EEG/ERP Analysis:
Methods and Applications, Taylor and
Francis K22384, (2014).
9.
Panda, R. et al., . Classification of EEG
signal using wavelet transform and support
vector machine for epileptic seizure diction.
Systems in Medicine and Biology (ICSMB),
pp. 405-408 (2010).
10.
Zandi, S. et al. A Novel Wavelet Based Index
to Detect Epileptic Seizures Using Scalp
EEG Signals. 30th Annual International
IEEE EMBS Conference Vancouve, British
Columbia, Canada, 1 (2008).
11.
Sekimoto, M. et al. Reduced Frontal
Asymmetry of Delta Waves During All-Night
Sleep in Schizophrenia. Schizophr Bull,
33(6), p. 1307–1311: (2006).

