University of Birmingham

Biosensing and geography
Osborne, Tessa; Jones, Phil
DOI:
10.1016/j.apgeog.2017.08.006
License:
Creative Commons: Attribution (CC BY)
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Citation for published version (Harvard):
Osborne, T & Jones, P 2017, 'Biosensing and geography: a mixed methods approach', Applied Geography, vol.
87, pp. 160-169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2017.08.006

Link to publication on Research at Birmingham portal

General rights
Unless a licence is specified above, all rights (including copyright and moral rights) in this document are retained by the authors and/or the
copyright holders. The express permission of the copyright holder must be obtained for any use of this material other than for purposes
permitted by law.
•Users may freely distribute the URL that is used to identify this publication.
•Users may download and/or print one copy of the publication from the University of Birmingham research portal for the purpose of private
study or non-commercial research.
•User may use extracts from the document in line with the concept of ‘fair dealing’ under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (?)
•Users may not further distribute the material nor use it for the purposes of commercial gain.
Where a licence is displayed above, please note the terms and conditions of the licence govern your use of this document.
When citing, please reference the published version.
Take down policy
While the University of Birmingham exercises care and attention in making items available there are rare occasions when an item has been
uploaded in error or has been deemed to be commercially or otherwise sensitive.
If you believe that this is the case for this document, please contact UBIRA@lists.bham.ac.uk providing details and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate.

Download date: 05. Mar. 2020

Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Applied Geography
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apgeog

Biosensing and geography: A mixed methods approach
Tess Osborne, Phil Ian Jones*
School of Geography, Earth & Environmental Sciences, University of Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 18 January 2017
Received in revised form
13 June 2017
Accepted 8 August 2017

Biosensing measures of physiological (somatic) response offer a potentially powerful tool for capturing
people's subconscious reactions to environmental stimuli. Combining biosensing with other techniques
allows insights to be generated not only about the intensity of somatic response but also, crucially, the
underlying causes of that response. Despite pioneering work in this area, a rigorous, empirically-led
analysis of biosensing measures in mixed methods research has hitherto been lacking. We address
this lacuna through a case study of urban walking, comparing a ﬁeld-based study (30 participants) with a
virtual exercise undertaken in a lab (25 participants). Combining biosensing with data on environmental
stimuli (recorded using video/GPS) and interviews, three analytical modes are examined: biosensing-led;
environment-led; and thematic-led. The analysis shows how each dataset can add contextualizing information to signiﬁcant phenomena observed in the others. We demonstrate, however, that biosensing
measures become considerably more difﬁcult to interpret beyond the controlled environment of the lab.
The paper concludes that biosensing should be seen as a valuable measure in ﬁeld studies, but one which
requires careful interpretation through other datasets, being of limited usefulness and reliability taken
alone.
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Keywords:
Biosensing
Embodiment
Mixed methods
Electrodermal activity
Urban walking

1. Introduction
Much research has been undertaken in cultural geography
examining questions of the body, although very little of this work
has sought to quantify physiological (somatic) response. In recent
years biosensing has been seen as offering the potential to explore
participants' reactions at an embodied level, beyond the subjectivity of self-reporting (Spinney, 2015). Despite excitement about
the potential for using biosensing equipment, geographers have
thus far failed to undertake a rigorous, empirically informed analysis of whether and how these devices should be deployed in ﬁeld
research.
Biosensing is an umbrella term for a variety of different somatic
measures including electrodermal activity (EDA), heart rate (HR),
blood volume pulse (BVP) and electroencephalograms (EEG). Devices recording somatic response have become cheaper and more
widely available in recent years and some measures can be used to
make inferences about the emotional state of the wearer. Unless
deployed within a mixed methods research design, however, the

context for these somatic responses is missing; in essence, biosensing can capture the what but not the why.
There are, therefore, two critical issues that we address in this
paper: the usability of biosensing data recorded in a ﬁeld context;
and how a mixed methods approach can contextualize the somatic
responses captured by biosensing devices. This analysis is undertaken through a case study of urban walking in which we contrast
data recorded in a lab using a virtual proxy with materials recorded
by participants in the ﬁeld. The comparison highlights the difﬁculty
of interpreting biosensing data recorded in the kinds of ﬁeld settings that tend to be of interest to geographers, where physiological
response and sensory stimuli are considerably less controlled than
in a lab context. We demonstrate how biosensing, environmental
and narrative datasets need to be combined to overcome the
shortcomings of biosensing technologies. The approach we outline
can be used to enhance our understandings of how people interact
with and respond to their environments, offering cultural geographers and others a signiﬁcant new technique for examining questions around embodiment.
2. Working with biosensing data

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: t.c.osborne@pgr.bham.ac.uk (T. Osborne), p.i.jones@bham.ac.
uk (P.I. Jones).

Christian Nold's (2009) Biomapping project pioneered a mixed
methods approach combining biosensing data with spatial position

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2017.08.006
0143-6228/© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

and qualitative data. Nold built a device to measure galvanic skin
response (GSR) and asked participants to walk around their
neighbourhood. He combined these GSR measurements with a GPS
track to produce maps. The GSR served as a measure of somatic
arousal and participants were asked to talk through their maps,
explaining the cause of observed peaks in arousal. Short quotes
from these interviews were subsequently pinned to the maps to
create a kind of qualitative GIS (Cope & Elwood, 2009) which gave
narrative contextualization to the biosensing data.
Nold's highly innovative work was not without its limitations.
His biosensor only captured GSR; devices available today record a
range of measures that can be examined in tandem to give more
nuanced insights beyond a simple measure of arousal. Nold's participants were also presented with their biosensing data and asked
to explain it, running the risk that they might ascribe false meaning
to the data in order to make sense of it themselves.
The Biomapping project had a strong element of artistic practice
and was undertaken as a commission for several municipalities.
Nold did not, however, undertake a detailed evaluation of the
strengths and weaknesses of combining biosensing and qualitative
data. The need for such an evaluation has become more pressing in
the years since Nold devised his biomapping technique in 2004.
Wearable biosensors have now become smaller, more reliable and
readily available. Today there is a large range of equipment available with differing degrees of accuracy (and cost), recording a variety of somatic measures (Table 1).
Research in affective science and affective computing has been
using biosensing equipment for many years to explore how somatic
response measured by these devices might be used to infer the
emotional state of the subject (Evans, 2001; Picard, 1997). The circumplex model of affect (see Fig. 1) used within these disciplines
(Posner, Russell, & Peterson, 2005) for categorizing different states
of arousal offers a useful framework for undertaking this analysis.
With careful interpretation, biosensing data of different kinds can
be used as a baseline from which to infer emotional response to
stimuli. These data cannot, however, be unambiguously correlated
with a person's actual emotion nor the context in which it arose
(Resch, Summa, Sagl, Zeile, & Exner, 2014) since emotions are
profoundly subjective.
3. Exploring worlds with biosensors
There has been some interesting work using biosensors to
examine the reactions of lab-based participants to virtual worlds,
particularly through video games (Sykes & Brown, 2003). Within
these virtual spaces, game designers purposefully manipulate the
somatic responses of players to keep them engaged (Ash, 2010) and
thus there is an obvious appeal to researching this engagement
using biosensing techniques. McMahan, Parberry, and Parsons
(2015), for example, employed the EMOTIV Epoc to measure the

Table 1
Overview of commonly available biosensing equipment.

Head

Wrist/ankle

Torso

Device

Data

EMOTIV Epoc/Insight
Muse headband
Tobii Pro
Apple Watch, Garmin,
FitBit
Empatica E4
Milestone Pod
BioHarness

EEG, cognitive response
EEG, relaxation
Eye tracking
GPS, Activity tracking, HR.

TempTraq
Garmin

HR, EDA, BVP, Skin temperature.
Activity tracking, Foot strike.
HR, Breathing rate, EDA, Skin
temperature.
Body temperature.
HR

161

EEG of participants playing platforming game ‘Super Meat Boy’.
Engagement and arousal levels were found to signiﬁcantly increase
during death events compared to regular gameplay.
Using biosensing equipment outside the controlled environs of a
lab, however, brings signiﬁcant challenges. Measuring EEG, for
example, works best when there is little or no movement of the
head, making data generated in the ﬁeld signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult
to interpret with precision. Readings of electrodermal activity (EDA
e a similar measure to the GSR used by Nold) can be disrupted
where a participant engages in physical activity that stimulates
sweating. Moreover, urban environments generate complex and
sometimes overwhelming multisensory stimulation (Edensor,
2007; Jones, 2012). As a result, it is difﬁcult to isolate what stimulus (or combination of stimuli) is producing a given somatic
response.
Regardless, geographers are beginning to explore the possibilities afforded by using biosensors in a mobile context (Spinney,
2015), particularly within subdisciplines concerned with health
and urban design. Aspinall, Mavros, Coyne, and Roe (2015), for
example, used measures of EEG, to examine a participant's somatic
(and by inference, emotional) response to walking around Edinburgh, UK. Using the EMOTIV Epoc and a GPS, they mapped
embodied responses experienced in different spaces of the city.
Crucially, however, there was no context given for what triggered
those somatic responses.
The Urban Emotions project (Resch et al., 2014; Zeile, Resch,
Exner, & Sagl, 2015) attempted to develop techniques for extracting georeferenced data about people's emotional state in real time
to inform spatial planning processes. The team sought to ‘ground
truth’ the biosensing data they had collected using a smartphone
application and volunteered geographic information. There were,
however, limitations to the ways in which this project attempted to
contextualize the biosensing data. In the smartphone application,
for example, self-reporting is limited to one word (for example
‘trafﬁc’) providing a rather superﬁcial account of the individual's
experience.
In a similar vein, Gravenhorst et al. (2012) used Self-Assessment
Manikin's surveys to quantify their participants' valence and
arousal rather than engaging with qualitative approaches such as
interviews, thereby missing the opportunity to collect more indepth reﬂections from participants. In a study closest to what we
report below, Ruskamp (2016) used bodyworn video in combination with EDA, which was used as a measure of stress. Ruskamp's
study is pioneering, but limited by being restricted to a ﬁxed route
in a homogeneous suburban area and, as he acknowledges, raises
more questions than it answers in terms of the number of variables
that could inﬂuence participants' EDA response.
4. Methods
This paper is based on two related projects that combined biosensing data with video and qualitative interviewing to examine
urban walking. The case studies were based, respectively, in a
physical and a virtual environment. Sitting playing a videogame is,
clearly, an imperfect proxy for urban walking, but allows participants to control ‘their’ apparent movements and thus feel in control
and interact with a space in a way that is not possible when, for
example, simply watching a video of a walk. The purpose of the
comparative study was to examine the limitations of the biosensing
data when taken into an uncontrolled outdoor environment. The
virtual study creates a baseline, with a much simpliﬁed sensory
environment (visual and auditory) to take account of when
analyzing the biosensing data. The virtual study also removes the
physical factors (movement and sweating) that can confound biosensing measures. Thus, by undertaking a comparative study the

162

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

Fig. 1. The circumplex model of affect (after Posner et al., 2005).

challenges of collecting these measures in a ﬁeld setting can be
evaluated against the more controlled (lab) environment in which
they were originally intended to be used.
In both cases, participants were set an exploration task during
which biosensing data was recorded using an Empatica E4 (Fig. 2).
The E4 is a compact, discreet wristband that measures EDA, BVP, HR
and skin temperature. We concentrated on using EDA, BVP and skin
temperature measures. This combination allows an analysis on
both axes of the circumplex model, going beyond Nold's work
which looked purely at arousal. Where EDA response indicates
arousal, a small rise in skin temperature (ﬂushing) suggests a
positive emotional response, whereas a small drop in temperature
(cold sweat) can indicate a negative response (Calderon &
Thompson, 2004; Harris, 2001). Because of variations in the physiology of individuals and the prevailing environmental conditions,

Fig. 2. The Empatica E4 wristband.

absolute numerical comparison between the data recorded would
reveal little. Instead relative variation in arousal was visually
interpreted for individual participants, with signiﬁcant events and
broad patterns identiﬁed.
The physical environment study examined participants'
emotional connection to heritage conservation areas using two
sites in Birmingham, UK. Thirty participants completed the task:
twenty in Bournville (average age 43, ranging from early twenties
to late sixties) and ten in the Jewellery Quarter (average age 34,
ranging from early twenties to late ﬁfties). Participants who either
lived or worked in the area were asked to undertake an unaccompanied walk around their neighbourhood for approximately
45 min wearing the Empatica E4 wristband, a GPS and a chest
mounted GoPro camera. Following the walk, participants watched
the video footage while undertaking a qualitative interview about
their emotional responses to the different spaces passed through.
The virtual environment study used the recreation of midnineteenth century London presented in the game Assassin's
Creed: Syndicate (Ubisoft, 2015). Twenty ﬁve participants (age range
mid-20s to mid-50s, 20 non-gamers, 12 females) were recruited
and instructed to navigate their way around the virtual city in a
completed and fully unlocked version of the game. Participants
were only shown how to operate the controls for walking, running,
and looking around and thus did not have to engage with the more
complex parkour and combat elements of the game (although some
chose to do so), leaving them free to explore the virtual city in a
more touristic fashion. Each participant wore the Empatica E4 for a
20-min period while playing the game, with a camcorder trained at
the screen to record gameplay. Participants subsequently undertook an interview whilst watching the gameplay video to discuss
their emotional responses to the navigation exercise. Reviewing the
footage, it was clear that although a small number of participants
took longer than the others to get to grips with the control mechanism, all managed to undertake quite long ‘walks’ exploring
different areas of the virtual city.
Both the virtual and physical studies employed a combination of
three datasets: biosensing, used to examine arousal and elements
of valence; qualitative interviews, to provide self-reported material
on valence and causal triggers; and video (plus GPS on the heritage
project), to provide spatial and environmental context. We analyze
each of these datasets in turn, examining how the other two can

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

add context and interpretative power to the third. The biosensingled approach looks for points of ﬂuctuation (i.e. arousal and deactivation) in the biosensing data which is then contextualized by
examining the video/GPS and interview data to explore triggers
and valence. The environment-led approach starts by examining the
spatial and environmental context shown in the video/GPS data,
looking for signiﬁcant events or general trends and examining
whether these environmental variations were reﬂected in the
biosensing and interview datasets. The thematic-led approach starts
with key themes discussed by participants, identifying and
exploring whether and how these align with the video/GPS and
biosensing data.
5. Approaches to analysis
5.1. Biosensing-led
The biosensing readings in both the physical and virtual studies
were subject to considerable variations between participants. Using
EDA as a proxy for arousal, one can identify three types of response:
i) very little variation in arousal (virtual study n ¼ 6/25, ﬁeld
study n ¼ 2/30)
ii) broad patterns, such as a slow rise or fall over time (virtual
study n ¼ 9/25, ﬁeld study n ¼ 17/30)
iii) rapid response generating distinct peaks in the dataset (virtual study n ¼ 10/25, ﬁeld study n ¼ 11/30).
A small but signiﬁcant number of recordings within the sample
fall into the ﬁrst category, showing little or no arousal response.
Clearly then, biosensing data cannot be relied upon to consistently
serve as an objective measure of arousal, given that the success of
measuring variations in stimulation appears to be highly dependent on participants' physiology. Indeed, some recordings in the
ﬁeld study showing slow variation can be interpreted as simply
reﬂecting participants' generally increasing perspiration levels as
they engaged in physical exercise. Exercise-led sweating is an issue
with the usability of EDA as a measure of arousal, particularly
where participants are engaged in moving around a ﬁeld setting.
Eight recordings of biosensing data on the physical environment
project failed to show anything more than movement-generated
sweating with a general climb in EDA levels as the walk progressed.
Notwithstanding this problem, for other participants this second category of slower trend-like responses within the EDA measures could be interpreted as having been driven by emotional
response when examined in conjunction with the video and
interview data. Participant V25 in the virtual city study, for
example, initially had a high level of arousal before a slow, steady
decline in EDA response was recorded. In the interview, this
participant revealed that in the early part of the virtual walk she
experienced signiﬁcant difﬁculty and stress in getting to grips with
the controls. As the session went on she became more conﬁdent in
manipulating the walking experience, which would in itself
partially explain the lowering of EDA response. More than this,
however, examining the video and interview data reveals that she
chose a highly conservative strategy for navigating the virtual city e
walking very slowly around a park and being exceedingly careful
not to bump into any pedestrians. In the interview, about halfway
through watching her gameplay she commented that:
I think that at the moment I was a bit bored. I didn't know what
to do. (interview with Participant V25, 11 November 2016)
This boredom e which she reﬂected on several times in the
remainder of the interview e can be understood as another factor

163

underlying the somatic deactivation that we see in her biosensing
data as she completed the virtual walk.
Another example of trend-like response can be seen in participant HB104 where there is a period of increased simulation, which
peaks around 13 min into the walk, followed by a gradual decline.
The skin temperature declines sharply during the stimulation
(Fig. 3), which could indicate the cooling effect of sweating during
what was an uphill walk. The sudden decline of skin temperature
around 45 min, however, does not occur alongside a rise in EDA,
thus ruling out bodily exertion (sweating) as a factor. In addition,
this decline in skin temperature occurred whilst walking around
the suburban streets of Bournville in the height of summer (Fig. 4).
It is therefore unlikely that an environmental factor could cause
such a signiﬁcant lowering of skin temperature. The interview data,
however, gives context for this decline:
When my wife and I moved here from town, it had been a
difﬁcult year, we had just moved house, which was very
stressful, and we were pregnant with our second child. I was
walking around getting to know the area because I needed to get
down to Cotteridge. I had never been down that road before at
time and I was listening to Mike Oldﬁelds's Tubular Bells on my
iPod. There's this bit where it builds up and because it had been
a stressful time I started looking at all these houses and suddenly being faced with all these terraces and all these different
realms. I just got overloaded and I just had to sit down and take a
breath. It made me think back to that today. (interview with
Participant HB104, 8 August 2016)
The decline in skin temperature represents a physiological
response which, following Evans (2001), we can infer was brought
on by a powerful and negative emotional reaction. It is clear,
however, that the explanation for this physiological response could
not be worked out from the GPS/video data alone. This emphasizes
the importance of the qualitative interview material in understanding what is being seen in the biosensing data e in this case the
space prompting recall of a stressful time in his life.
The third category of responses within the biosensing data
where rapid peaks are observed is perhaps the most tantalizing
because it seems to offer the potential to identify individual events
within people's interactions with different environments. As an
example, a signiﬁcant spike can be seen at one point in the EDA
readings of participant HB120. Although this was not explained by
the interview data, the video footage shows that the participant
passes a member of the public at the time of the spike (Fig. 5). This
was, however, a relatively unusual example among the ﬁeld-based
participants and our comparative study indicates that event-type
peaks are signiﬁcantly more intense and easier to read in biosensing data collected within the controlled environmental conditions of a lab. In the virtual city project, there were some good
examples of individuals having quite dramatic variations in their
EDA record. This was the case with Participant V1 (Fig. 6):
Reﬂecting on the last of these incidents, the participant commented that:
I was trying really hard to cross the road, sensibly, without
getting run over or whatever. So he [carriage driver] stops, so I
went round him, then I stopped for the next one. [laughs]
(Interview with Participant V1, 15 August 2016)
The large variations in arousal can be easily mapped onto a
series of events within the video (see Table 2); here the interview
material merely reinforces the fact that the participant was ﬁnding
it rather challenging to explore a busy, unfamiliar city, crowded

164

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

Fig. 3. The initial decline in skin temperature seen here can be interpreted as an artefact of response to physical exertion. The drop from around 45 min is not accompanied by a rise
in EDA, suggesting that exertion is not the driving factor. Interview material links this response to a personal narrative about a stressful event previously having taken place in that
location.

Fig. 4. Video still from HB104's walk. Ashmore Road, Bournville in the summertime.

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

165

Fig. 5. Video still from HB120's walk. Bournville Lane, Bournville at the point when a member of the public walks past the participant producing a spike in the EDA data.

with pedestrians and slow moving vehicles.
In some cases, however, it is more difﬁcult to interpret an
apparent event-type arousal from the video data alone. Participant
V21, for example, sees a sharp upward trend in EDA levels at around
the 12 min mark. The gameplay footage shows nothing remarkable
e the character is simply running along the long straight road of
Embankment heading toward the Houses of Parliament. At this

point in the interview, however, the interviewee commented:
I was conscious that at this point time was beginning to run out,
and you'd be knocking on the door soon. I thought “I want to see
these sites before, before I get … to the end of the kind of time
period”. (Interview with Participant V21, 27 October 2016)

Fig. 6. Biosensing data from Participant V1 showing a series of dramatic peaks coinciding with events within gameplay. Skin temperature shows a slower response, with a
downward trend at the mid-point coinciding with a period of fewer event-based peaks of EDA before rising again.

166

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

Fig. 7. Video still from Participant V1. Participant avoiding being run down by horses and carriages while crossing a busy road. Source: Ubisoft.

Table 2
Summary of events coinciding with peaks in EDA response for Participant V1.
Time into walk
(mins)

Event shown on video

5:13

Was previously carefully looking around but then had to cross
a road avoiding a horse and cart.
Getting stuck trying to walk past some pedestrians.
A series of events: bumping into someone, then carefully
avoiding bumping into a child, running before slowing down
to avoid a man and cross a road.
Crossing a busy road while avoiding several horses and carts.
(Fig. 7)

7:11
12:00

16:00

Given that this participant talked extensively about planning,
building, and architecture, it was clear that seeing key sites held a
great deal of personal importance, hence the self-reported
worrying about potentially missing out on seeing them. The slow
downward trajectory of EDA levels from about 1 min after the initial
peak can then be reinterpreted through the video footage, showing
the point where Big Ben appears on the horizon, followed by a few
minutes of running around a series of sites in Whitehall which were
familiar to the participant from his real life.

5.2. Environment-led
The physical environment project recorded the location of participants' walks using GPS, meaning that maps of the biosensing
data could be produced indicating relative arousal in different locations. This mode of analysis allowed us to identify a potential
effect of blue and green space on arousal levels among some participants. As an example, Participant HB107's walk (Fig. 8) shows a
high level of arousal whilst walking downhill along a very narrow,
busy road (Oak Tree Lane). Upon entering the green space at the
Valley Parkway and walking around a small lake, EDA levels
declined markedly:
Interviewer: What was your favorite place on the walk today?
HB107: Probably the yachting pool actually, it's lovely … all the
ducks were out and the geese. And everyone round there,
everyone I met, like the blokes with their little boats, there were

lots of joggers … it's just a nice place to be. It was really relaxing.
(Interview with Participant HB107, 9 August 2016)
HB107 was one of three participants (along with HB103 and
HB108) who displayed a similar drop in EDA whilst walking around
the lake in the Valley Parkway. Because we were not speciﬁcally
researching the impact of green/blue space on stimulation levels,
we do not have enough data to make a claim here to support the
literature on the calming effects of green space (Kaplan & Kaplan,
1989). Nonetheless, an environment-led examination of the biosensing data raises some interesting questions about how the
relationship between green space and arousal could be examined
in future research.
Although the virtual city project does not have GPS data to draw
on, one can use the video material to identify locations and environmental stimuli of interest to the researchers. Given that the
researchers will likely have asked about these events during the
playback-led interviews, the biosensing data theoretically gives an
opportunity to see whether those events created a signiﬁcant somatic response in the participants. This offers the potential to
sidestep issues of power and participants attempting to please the
researcher by giving the ‘right’ answer to a question about whether
an event was signiﬁcant to them. In common with McMahan et al.
(2015), we often saw peaks in EDA response where death events
happened within the virtual environment. Similarly, ﬁghts, carriage
chases, and parkour activities sometimes (but not always) coincided with arousal. Again, however, given the signiﬁcant variability
of EDA response between individuals we would be cautious about
claiming that this is a reliable means of being able to determine
whether someone found one event more or less important than
another. Conventional qualitative interviews, even with the intendant questions of power relations, thus remain crucial when
attempting to determine the relative signiﬁcance of events.
5.3. Thematic-led
This approach begins with a conventional process of coding
qualitative interviews, looking for key themes that emerge when
reading across the interview dataset. Having identiﬁed key themes,
the video footage is re-examined to identify any environmental
stimuli that prompted discussion on such topics. The timing on the

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

167

Fig. 8. GPS track from Participant HB107 showing apparent calming effect of walking around the boating lake in the Valley Parkway. Source: Base map, Ordnance Survey Streetview
1: 10 000, 2017.

video footage can then be used to identify whether or not those
stimuli are associated with an arousal response within the biosensing data and give an indication of relative importance to a
participant.
In the virtual city project, one of the strongest themes that came
out was participants layering their personal experience into their
understanding of the videogame space. Two participants (V16 and

V24) mentioned their fear of heights, talking about how the virtual
experience was triggering their real world physical response when
looking over the edge of high buildings: “I could feel that in my
tummy. You know, that kind of duuuuuu.” (Interview with Participant V24, 18 November 2016). In neither case, however, did the
EDA data show any signiﬁcant arousal response associated with the
events being described. Another participant talked about relating a

168

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

walk next to the Thames to a memory of an early morning walk
around that part of London after attending a John Carpenter movie
marathon. In the interview he expressed frustration about the
virtual walk being interrupted after being attacked by some other
characters:
… actually, I was enjoying the whole walk thing and I don't want
to get involved in a ﬁght, so I started running away. But I kept
getting shot. (Interview with Participant V5, 25 August 2016)
This irritation was reﬂected in a sudden EDA peak. Given the
rarity of these kinds of event spikes, as discussed above, it is quite
unusual to ﬁnd examples such as this one where themes that
emerged strongly in the qualitative coding map neatly onto a
response in the biosensing data.
Thematic analysis can, therefore, identify issues that participants identify as being of importance which may otherwise be
missed when starting the analysis from the biosensing data. In the
heritage project, a key theme that emerged was nostalgia. For
example:
HB105: Two weekends in June and July, one weekend is the
Bournville festival, which is pretty much set in stone since 1955.
And then there is CocoMad, which is the festival here, which
changes every year with things that are new and different. So
yeah, we don't want this place to be the same, we want it to
change all the time. It's always doing new things.
Interviewer: Which one is better?
HB105: Oh we are way better! Their's is ridiculous with weird
nostalgic stuff. (Interview with Participant HB105, 7 August
2016)
These kinds of discussions framing the contested identity of the
case study sites simply do not appear to map onto the biosensing
data. The qualitative analysis indicates, however, that these issues
are accompanied by a verbalized strong emotional response even if
that is not visible in the participant's somatic response to landscape
at a given moment.

6. Discussion
Mixed methods approaches have two distinct advantages. First,
they give additional conﬁdence where ﬁndings from one type of
data can also be seen in another, particularly when cutting across
quantitative and qualitative methods. Secondly, some techniques
can capture things that others cannot thus giving a different
perspective on the research topic (Creswell & Clark, 2007). Both
advantages are evident here in the way that we deployed the biosensing data alongside environmental and narrative data.
Each of the three datasets raise questions, some of which can be
answered by examining the others. A lab setting allows for multisensory factors and physical exertion to be isolated and controlled,
which makes it easier to interpret biosensing data, both in terms of
simple arousal and also inferred emotional valence. As we have
demonstrated here by contrasting the two case studies, however,
stepping outside the lab introduces a great deal of ‘noise’ into the
biosensing recordings, through multisensory and physiological
stimuli. This can make them challenging to interpret and brings a
high failure rate.
Even in the lab, however, without an understanding of what
prompted a particular somatic response, biosensing data taken in
isolation tells us the what but not the why. An understanding of
environmental stimuli (spatial location and activity) can often be

used to infer the reason behind a somatic response. In turn, some
somatic responses may be very speciﬁc to an individual's memories
and experience, which needs to be captured through qualitative
interviewing.
We suggest that the most productive approach is the one we
have adopted here i.e. looking at the physiological (biosensing),
environmental (video/GPS) and personal (interviewing) datasets in
turn and examining how interesting elements identiﬁed in each
can be contextualized by the other two. This reinforcing effect does
not occur in every case, as things that seem interesting to the researchers in, say, the video footage, may have been of little significance to the participant, thus not appearing in the interview or
biosensing data. Nonetheless, taking the different measures in
combination gives the opportunity to cross-examine ﬁndings from
individual datasets, both for contextualizing and deepening
understanding.

7. Conclusion
In an ideal world, one could imagine biosensing technologies as
an inexpensive and objective way of gathering people's somatic and
(by inference) emotional responses to different environments. In
practice, however, state of mind, physical ﬁtness, the prevailing
environmental conditions, and a host of other factors inﬂuence the
generation of biosensing data. Although we have concentrated here
on the Empatica E4, these problems are common to the range of
biosensing devices and measures. Geographers will be interested in
these techniques primarily for their potential to be deployed in the
ﬁeld. Even within the controlled environs of the lab, however, it is
difﬁcult to isolate and interpret the multiple factors that can shape
an individual's somatic response; with the additional multisensory
stimulation and physical exertion of a ﬁeld setting it becomes
exceedingly challenging to do so.
We have argued that, taken alone, biosensing data needs to be
treated with caution. Indeed, there is always the danger of using an
exciting new technique simply for the sake of novelty (Merriman,
2013). Nonetheless, biosensing offers a potentially powerful tool
for understanding individuals' responses to environments, but only
when used in combination with other datasets. This paper has
demonstrated the potential for integrating biosensing into mixed
methods approaches alongside environmental and narrative data.
Combining biosensing with other techniques allows insights to be
generated not only about the intensity of somatic response but also,
crucially, the underlying causes of that response. Biosensing cannot
be seen as giving unfettered access to an individual's unexpressed
emotional responses. It does, however, serve as a useful quantiﬁed
measure adding value to mixed methods projects interested in
examining the relationship between bodies and environments.
Cultural geographers have been at the forefront of research into
embodiment and the approach that we have outlined here offers
considerable scope for enhancing this area of scholarship through a
critical examination of somatic response to environments. It is
important to highlight, however, that the circumplex model we use
in this paper offers a somewhat different understanding of affect
than that familiar to most cultural geographers (Thien, 2005; Thrift,
2008). These philosophically rather different approaches to
embodiment will need to be reconciled in order for the potential of
biosensing data within geography to be fully realized.

Acknowledgement
This work was funded as part of a grant from the Economic and
Social Research Council ES/J50001X/1.

T. Osborne, P.I. Jones / Applied Geography 87 (2017) 160e169

References
Ash, J. (2010). Architectures of affect: Anticipating and manipulating the event in
processes of videogame design and testing. Environment and Planning D: Society
and Space, 28, 653e671.
Aspinall, P., Mavros, P., Coyne, R., & Roe, J. (2015). The urban brain: Analysing
outdoor physical activity with mobile EEG. British Journal of Sports Medicine,
49(4), 272e276.
Calderon, K. S., & Thompson, W. W. (2004). Biofeedback relaxation training: A
rediscovered mind-body tool in public health. American Journal of Health
Studies, 19(4), 185e194.
Cope, M., & Elwood, S. (2009). Qualitative GIS: A mixed methods approach. London:
Sage.
Creswell, J. W., & Clark, V. L. P. (2007). Designing and conducting mixed methods
research. London: Sage.
Edensor, T. (2007). Sensing the ruin. Senses and Society, 2(2), 217e232.
Evans, D. (2001). Emotion: The science of sentiment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gravenhorst, F., Tessendorf, B., Muaremi, A., Kappeler-Setz, C., Arnrich, B., &
€ster, G. (2012). Mobile system for unobtrusive monitoring of electrodermal
Tro
activity in daily life. In International workshop on ubiquitous health and wellness
(UbiHealth), Newcastle.
Harris, C. R. (2001). Cardiovascular responses of embarrassment and effects of
emotional suppression in a social setting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(5), 886e897.
Jones, P. (2012). Sensory indiscipline and affect: A study of commuter cycling. Social
& Cultural Geography, 13(6), 645e658.
Kaplan, R., & Kaplan, S. (1989). The experience of nature: A psychological perspective.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McMahan, T., Parberry, I., & Parsons, T. D. (2015). Evaluating player task engagement
and arousal using electroencephalography. Procedia Manufacturing, 3,

169

2303e2310.
Merriman, P. (2013). Rethinking mobile methods. Mobilities, 9(2), 167e187.
Nold, C. (2009). Emotional cartography: Technologies of the self. http://
emotionalcartography.net/EmotionalCartography.pdf. (Accessed 13 June 2017).
Picard, R. (1997). Affective computing. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Posner, J., Russell, J. A., & Peterson, B. S. (2005). The circumplex model of affect: An
integrative approach to affective neuroscience, cognitive development, and
psychopathology. Development and Psychopathology, 17(3), 715e734.
Resch, B., Summa, A., Sagl, G., Zeile, P., & Exner, J.-P. (2014). Urban emotions: Geosemantic emotion extraction from technical sensors, human sensors and
crowdsourced data. In G. Gartner, & H. Huang (Eds.), Progress in location-based
services (pp. 199e212). New York: Springer.
Ruskamp, P. (2016). Your environment and you: Investigating stress triggers and
characteristics of the built environment. Unpublished Masters Thesis. Kansas
State University.
Spinney, J. (2015). Close encounters? Mobile methods, (post)phenomenology and
affect. Cultural Geographies, 22(2), 231e246.
Sykes, J., & Brown, S. (2003). Affective gaming: Measuring emotion through the
gamepad. In CHI '03 extended abstracts on human factors in computing systems
(pp. 732e733), Florida, USA.
Thien, D. (2005). After or beyond feeling? A consideration of affect and emotion in
geography. Area, 37(4), 450e454.
Thrift, N. (2008). Non-representational Theory: Space, politics, affect. London:
Routledge.
Ubisoft. (2015). Assassin's creed syndicate. Rennes: Ubisoft.
Zeile, P., Resch, B., Exner, J.-P., & Sagl, G. (2015). Urban emotions: Beneﬁts and risks
in using human sensory assessment for the extraction of contextual emotion
information in urban planning. In S. Geertman, J. Ferreira, R. Goodspeed, &
J. C. H. Stillwell (Eds.), Planning support systems and smart cities (pp. 209e225).
Berlin: Springer.

