(IJARAI) International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 1, No. 7, 2012

Brain Computer Interface
Boulevard of Smarter Thoughts
Sumit Ghulyani , Yashasvi Pratap, Sumit Bisht, Ravideep Singh
Department Of Computer Science & Engineering
Dronacharya College of Engineering
Gurgaon, Haryana, India
Abstract — The Brain Computer Interface is a major
breakthrough for the technical industry, medical world, military
and the society on a whole. It is concerned with the control of
devices around us such as computing gears & even automobiles
in the near future without really the physical intervention of the
user. It helps bridge the communication gap between the society
and the disabled. This mainly lays its focus on people suffering
from brainstem stroke, going through a spinal cord injury or
even blindness. BCI helps such patients to retain or restore
communication with the outside world through intelligent signals
from the brain due to the high risk of paralysis under such
circumstances. This is achieved by a signal acquisition technique
and converting these signals available from the sensors placed on
the scalp into real-time computer commands that can be visually
operated and understood. It has nothing to do with the natural
neural transmission of brain signals but extracts them with the
help of sensors to be processed and direct the outputs to an
external device.
This may also prove to be a major military gadget where troops
may communicate their thoughts in highly stressed situations
without breaking the hush. But, as every technology have some
merits and demerits, so does BCI.
Keywords- Brain Computer Interface (BCI); Blood Oxygen Level
Dependent (BOLD); Electrocorticography (ECoG); Practical
Electrical Stimulation (PES); Electroencephalograph (EEG);
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI),Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) brain scythe, motor cortex.

I.

OVERVIEW

A plethora of thoughts is ready to open up and make things
work just fine as they did ever. In the human brain, the
thoughts and emotions are transmitted in the form of electric
signals with the help of those millions of neurons. The
following figure below displays a wireless neuro-headset
developed by Emotiv Systems which detects brainwave
signals and categorizes them specifically into conscious &nonconscious thoughts
This makes possible selected processing of only
appropriate signals that are meant to be transmitted by the user
[1]. This device makes use of the same set of electrodes as
sensors which are used in the medical examination known as
electroencephalograph, or in short EEG. The display is
maintained by an advanced software program than the old
EEG paper & pen tracker scheme.

Figure 1. BCI Developed by Emotiv Systems

MRI or Magnetic Resonance Imaging technique is under
research to be used in BCIs as an effective approach to map
actual part of the brain with the task to be performed. With
Brain Computer Interface, the control of the world, on a
whole, lays in the hands of thoughts & emotions. The power
behind the advent of this technology is the working of the
human brain itself. Though a person maybe disabled with
speech, hearing or a total “locked-in”, the brain never stops
functioning. This feature is made use of in BCI using external
peripheral gears to detect these signals and convert them into
visual commands that can be read and understood. In the
course of this, the actions of the brain are manipulated to
control the computing gears and communication devices
instead of generating signals using the traits of a motor
movement.
The figure 2 is a depiction of the BrainGate technology
which is a part of the research carried on at the Brown Institute
for Brain Science. It aims at implanting a baby sensor in the
gray matter which will read the electric signals and transmit
them to the computer system. Evenly, the research in the field
of Human Computer Interaction has achieved impressive
results in the rapid & heavy transmission of signals from the
computer to the human brain using sensory channels and vice
versa. A phase of perceptual computing is about to begin
which studies user’s psychology and operating environment to
process the information about a user’s intent.

27 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJARAI) International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 1, No. 7, 2012

reproduced by decoding the neural shots in the cat’s brain. In
this process, the electrodes were implanted in the region of the
dual lobed grey matter called the thalamus, which records the
actions perceived by the retina. The generation and
reconstruction of the data was hack done by gradually
synthesizing and decoding the signals obtained over a period
of time with the visual perceptions involved.
The human intervention as subjects took place in Japan
when researchers implanted electrodes to a patient’s scalp and
similar results were achieved. A further research at the
University of Pittsburgh led to the use of even fewer neurons
than ever in a working Brain Computer Interface. They
brought about a jaw-breaker advancement which displayed a
monkey’s brain activity to control a robotic arm that fed him
with fruits kept beside him. Research groups all around the
globe are working towards applying kinematics to the concept
of BCIs to retain normal muscle movement of the patient by
stimulating the muscles electrically.

Figure 2. Chip Implantation

In this way, a computer can adapt itself according to the
user and the task to be performed thereby giving phenomenal
results. If extensive research is done and one succeeds in
recognizing the signals transmitted when light falls on the
retina it may lead to a major breakthrough of BCI in the
medical world which may grant artificial vision to the blind.
And as we see, possibilities are endless.
II.

HISTORY

The past of the Brain Computer Interface can be dated
back to the time when Electroencephalography was in his
early years of birth. This became possible with the successful
research of German scientist Hans Berger, who in 1924,
succeeded in recording the electrical signals in the human
brain. He successfully analyzed the oscillatory activity of the
brain and discovered the Alpha wave, also popularly known as
the Berger’s wave. Though his instrumentation, which
consisted of Lippmann capillary electrometer and silver wires,
was very desolate and led to unsuccessful results in advanced
phases, he was able to mark the start of a revolution. Success
was later achieved with the help of Siemens double coil
recording galvanometer which made recording of electric
signals as small as one ten thousandth of a volt. Berger’s
preliminary work led to success in elimination of various
diseases related to brain cells and the advancement of the
Electroencephalography or EEG, in short. The actual birth of
the first relative to Brain Computer Interface took place in
1969 at the University Of Washington, School of Medicine
(UWSOM), Seattle [2]. A monkey was used as the subject
where he successfully deflected a biofeedback meter
measuring arm with the intervention of his neural activity.
Another subsequent research used the same subject, but in
numbers to announce the voluntary control of solo and
multiple neurons in the primary cortex. Many research groups
have been able to record the neurological stimuli and depict
them with the various body movements thus controlled.
A major breakthrough was achieved when Philip Kennedy
were successful in implanting electrodes in a monkey’s cortex.
With the passage of time, a change in the subject was brought
when monkeys and rats were replaced by cats for further
research issues at Berkeley when visual images were

Figure 3. Association of brain signals with movement of hand

III.

OPERATIONAL TRAITS

The performance of a BCI is completely based on the
approach our intellect functions. Our brain is crammed with
neurons, entity nerve cells allied to one another by dendrites
and axons that bear electronic signals all through the entire
body. Every time we think, budge, sense or consider
something, our neurons are at labour. That work is carried out
by these miniature electric signals that whiz from neuron to
neuron as prompt as 250 mph. The signals are generated by
differences in electric prospective carried by ions on the
membrane flanked by two neurons. Although the routes the
signals take are insulated by something called myelin, some of
the electric signal escape [3].
Scientists with the exploit of modern technology can
perceive those signals, construe what they mean and utilize
them to direct a device of some breed. It can also work the
other way around. For example, researchers could outline out
what signals are sent to the brain by the diverse sensory organs
for example, the signals in the aural nerve can be traced and
the task of hearing can be mapped. An even more remarkable
use of this technology is that the signals can be generated to be
sent to the brain and a enthused sense of hearing can be
induced in the subject even if one is deaf. One of the biggest
challenges in front of brain-computer interface researchers at
the moment is the basic technicalities of the interface itself.
The sleekest and least detrimental is a set of electrodes, an
apparatus known as an electroencephalograph (EEG) which is
attached to the scalp.

28 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJARAI) International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 1, No. 7, 2012

Dependent in fMRI. It is advancement to MRI and measures
brain activity, but by detecting changes in the flow of blood.

Figure 4. Electroencephalogram (EEG) scan

The electrodes interpret brain signals. However, the
cranium restricts a lot of electrical signal, and distorts
whatever does get through it.
As a resolution, scientists may implant electrodes directly
into the brain, or on the facade of the brain. This aids in higher
reception of electric signals and allows electrode positioning
in the particular area where those explicit signals are
generated. The electrodes assess minuscule differences in the
voltage amid neurons. The signals are then augmented and
interpreted by a computer program. In the case of an infix
BCI, the method is overturned. A mainframe will renovate a
signal, like from a tape, into the voltages that would elicit
neurons. The signal generated from a peripheral apparatus is
sent to an electroencephalograph (EEG) detector installed in
the relevant quarter of the brain. The neurons in the head are
enthused with these signals and the subject obtains an
illustration, reverberation or a related sensory familiarity
parallel to whatsoever gear is used.

Figure 6. Blood flow imagery obtained from an fMRI

With this advancement, on might just sneak in someone
else’s brain and derive its thoughts and even detect lies. The
basic idea behind this technology originated from the fact that
blood rich in oxygen behaves differently to a magnetic field
than deoxygenated samples. In other words, both have
different magnetic resonance traits. The more active parts of a
brain receive higher flow of oxygenated blood. The procedure
for the test is similar to the present MRI and uses only
magnetic fields and radio waves. Though no radiations are
used, it is highly advised not to be performed during
pregnancy, and on people with artificial limbs or pacemaker
[4].
This technique is medically used rarely but to monitor the
growth of tumors and regulate the normal functioning of the
brain after a stroke. Brain Mapping is an emerging field for
fMRI which will make Brain Computer Interfaces even
superior as it determines the areas of brain that control the
various body movements and moreover on planning surgery
and market survey & research.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) also
possesses certain vantages and detriments. The major breaker
is that this technology is still in its birth phase and the
researchers know very less regarding the overall working of
the apparatus. Moreover, the setup is really expensive to be
used for research and brain computer interfaces. To continue,
it works only when the subject lays still and thus a lot of work
needs to be done.

Figure 5. MRI Scanner

A substitute approach to scrutinize and assess brain bustle
is using a Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI). The MRI setup
is a colossal and convoluted apparatus. It produces high decree
imagery of the brain, but it can't be used as component of an
enduring BCI. Researchers use it to swot up definite brain
functions or to plot in the brain the quarter where electrodes
should be sited to evaluate an unambiguous task.
IV.

FMRI

Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging or more
popularly fMRI is a non-invasive, much similar technique as
the MRI or Magnetic Resonance Imaging, the only difference
being the basic measure of BOLD i.e. Blood Oxygen Level

The major breakthrough that gets it going is the absence of
any radiation in any phase of the scan as in X-ray scan and
PET and the positive feedback and response from the tests
carried out. Though scores of tests resulted in a higher level of
bewilderment amongst the researchers since fMRI relates to
the blood flow only and not on the individual neuron
functioning in the brain and the blood flow measure was not
enough to critically examine and complement on the results
thus obtained.
V.

BCI SPEECH

The BCI system can be trained what an individual’s brain
scrutiny or EEG looks like when one is focused on a fussy

29 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJARAI) International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 1, No. 7, 2012

article, since the electrical oomph in the brain changes in
proportion to what the individual is doing. The rise of Electrocorticography (ECoG) has been a new hint podium for braincomputer interface systems. Consequently, it was anonymous
whether further neuro-physiological substrates, such as the
vocalization net, might be used to further develop on or
harmonize on motor-based power paradigms. For the foremost
instance, that ECoG signals allied with diverse, blatant and
anticipated phoneme enunciation can facilitate invasively
monitored patients to manage a one-dimensional computer
pointer precisely.
This stuff was discernible within upper gamma regularity
oscillations and enabled clients to realize concluding object
accuracies flanked by 68% and 91% in 15 minutes [5]. In
addition, one of the patients achieved full-bodied control via
recordings from a micro array that consisted of 1 mm spaced
micro wires. These results proposed that the cortical system
allied with verbal communication could present an added
cognitive substrate for BCI maneuver. Subsequently, these
signals can be recorded from a cortical assortment that is
minute and austerely invasive.
VI.

into the brute muscle of the subject’s upper limb. When the
subject tries to shift his arm, the huddle of 100 neurons
activates, creating a torrent of data which can be examined and
analyzed by the BCI to foresee what muscles the subject is
trying to budge, and with what intensity. This interpreted
statistics is conceded to the PES, which then triggers the
correct muscles to execute the preferred movement. The last
part outcome is a mainframe network that in actual fact
replaces the nervous structure and restores fine motor control
to a paralyzed arm.
C. Bionic prosthetic ogle
A bionic prosthetic ogle is the mock eye for the sightless or
a being with a hitch in seeing matter due to a defected retina. It
speaks the tongue of the brain by transmitting the signals fired
by the retina when something is seen. This is the sense in the
wake of the prosthetic eye. Electric pulses are measured by
attaching electrodes to an animal’s optic nerves.

APPLICATIONS

A. Brain scythe
It’s trouble-free to scythe a computer, but nearly everyone
always considered that hacking the human intellect was
unfeasible. As seen in science fiction movies and novels like
the Matrix, Brainstorm & Surrogates, play around with
gaining admittance to the human mind. But, researchers have
finally confirmed the leeway to hack the human brain [6]. The
researchers used a brain mainframe interface, usually used in
following a line of investigation that scans brain patterns.

Figure 8. Components of a Bionic Prosthetic Eye

One might not know, but if a retina at all times generates
the same electric cipher when looking at a building, and a
dissimilar code when a being is in sight, work can be retreated
to derive the retina’s tangible programming procedure. This
revolution would leave mankind startled when a silicon chip
would be installed into the eye and then wired to the optic
nerves.
D.

Figure 7. Brain Scythe

The contemporary models consent to users to be in charge
of their computers with their thoughts, but the researchers
have verified that it goes well both ways. The panel built a part
of custom software that can, in essence, interpret the mind.
They were proficient enough to effectively use the software
pooled with the brain scanner to mine susceptible data
including credit card PINs, address, DOB and other.
B. Restores spinal coordination
Researchers at Chicago have lucratively bypassed the
spinal flex and restored well motor control to paralyzed limbs
by means of a brain-computer interface. The researchers have
shaped a neuro-prosthesis that groups a BCI that is wired
directly into 100 neurons in the motor cortex of the subject,
and a Practical Electrical Stimulation (PES) tool that is wired

Restored neurological implementation
Brain computer interface can facilitate the cases where
flexibility has been smacked or got narrow by a stroke.
Scientists in St. Louis have revealed the detection of the brain
signals simply thinking on affecting a partly or wholly
paralyzed limb. The damaged half of the brain that is
responsible normally for moving the hand can no longer do so,
so the hint arrives from the unharmed other half of the brain.
To lay bare the prospective to help restore motion, scientists
allied electrode-detected brain signals to the movement of a
marker on the computer panel. Researchers are now working
out a motorized glove which will turn all the imagination into
a reality.
VII. DETRIMENTS
Every technology suffers severe drawbacks, but it does not
halt the research process, although slows down the speed at
which advancements appear. The major breaker of this
technology is that BCIs are still in crude form and need to be
refined for the ‘future of thoughts’ to come alive. The

30 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJARAI) International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 1, No. 7, 2012

development process is further slowed by certain ethical issues
on the road to success. The complexity of the brain adds up to
the massacre being equipped with a staggering 100 billion
neurons, and detecting the association of the type of neurons
with specific body movements looks arduous.
The structure and placement of electrodes needs a research
in itself since the one placed outside the skull are unable to
detect appropriate signal voltage to produce optimal results.
Moreover, the electrodes implanted inside the skull cause
damage to the tissues and may even lead to serious scars
resulting in undesired effects
VIII. VANTAGES
But, as BCIs appear to be the gate to an era of thoughtful
communication, the research goes on keeping in mind the
extra edge its merits showcase despite its failures. Paralysis
will never stay a curse as in the history of medical sciences
since the patients will be able to communicate with their mates
and docs through a graphical BCI. To add to it, they may even
help in the movement of prosthetic limbs to sink the effect of
any motion related impairment. Visual & hearing impairments
may become history as these interfaces act as artificial eyes &
ears transmitting data to and fro the human mind successively.

IX.

PROPOSED WORK

(i)

Advancements in fMRI must occur so as to scan and
process even the moving parts of subject and not the part
which lies still.
(ii) Development of robotic limbs to provide co-ordination
with the brain computer interface.
(iii) The electrodes to be used in the interface carcass should
be made highly sensitive so as to provide exterior signal
detection without the installation of the electrodes in the
grey matter.
(iv) Combined tests to be conducted based on both MRI &
fMRI to determine collectively the association of
different hotspots in the brain to diverse body
movements by deriving the relationship between blood
flow and neuron activity.
(v) Development of high resolution interface displays to
record brain activity.
(vi) Provisions and techniques to restrict unauthorized
enforced access to someone else’s brain.
X.

CONCLUSION

The research goes on and the possibilities of refinement are
as vast as the universe, never ending. The maximum a human
brain can think of what it can do is the result in the making of
the American science scripture Surrogates (2009) directed by
Jonathan Mostow [8].
The scripture shows how the world of humans turns into an
era of surrogates which are none other than robotic bodies
which are controlled by human brains from home. The
surrogates are set to work almost everything physically, be it
routine tasks or strategic war situations without any human
intervention but mind control.
The world changes and divides into 2 parts – humans &
machines until the surrogate inventor himself devises a deadly
weapon on seeing the far-sighted fate of his invention that
starts wiping out the surrogates along with its users. But, this
is as we know long way ahead in the future.

Figure 9. Military “Surrogate” Robots

With gradual improvements, the armed forces may get
even better armed with this interface. Communication can
occur without any vocal disturbance, and who knows armed
surrogates may come in effect very soon [7].
This will lead to less loss of men but money on the
battlefield, as they are stationed far away and connected to
their subject surrogate machines which operate in the main
field and the troops live even if their surrogate is blown away
by a grenade. This means a commandment of 1000 soldiers
may fight all their life with different bodies. The world of
entertainment is about to get vowed with this new technology,
as gamers will now control their milieu with the might of their
mind.

As of the birth of the Brain Computer Interface, it is bliss
on medical grounds for the patients suffering from spinal cord
injuries or impaired hearing or vision. A new era of thought
has raised its head in this chaotic world which will help
change the way of communication, since humans appeared
first on earth.
Partial immobility or paralysis will disappear from the
medical books as a curse. This can also be a major
breakthrough for the armed forces to communicate with each
other in highly stressed situations like war & terrorism, but
this may even lead to a major demerit if gone in wrong hands.
By wrong hands I mean wrong minds which may use this boon
as a bane against the human society as a whole.

31 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJARAI) International Journal of Advanced Research in Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 1, No. 7, 2012

With progress in research, one may forget his very own
mouse and keyboard, the somewhat most essential input
components of a computer system as they are replaced with
these interfaces. When applied to robotics, these interfaces
may help physically challenged people to gain the same place
in the society as any other normal person.
With advancements, BCIs may help such people to control
robotic bodies with their brain to cope with their routine tasks.
So, let the brain do the talking and send your jaw muscles on a
vacation, just saying. Despite of all the detriments, the merits
give the BCIs that extra edge which makes it a possible suitor
for a better future.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]
[8]

REFERENCES
Emotiv: EEG Systems http://emotiv.com/
About
BCIs
http://inventors.about.com/od/bstartinventions/a/JohnDonoghue.htm
HowStuffWorks:
Brain
Computer
Interfaces
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/brain-computer- interface.htm
How fMRI Works http://science.howstuffworks.com/fmri.htm
Using
Electrocorticography
speech
for
BCI
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21471638
Gaining
Access
To
Brain
at
$300
only
http://www.webpronews.com/your-brain-can-now-be-hacked-for-under200-2012-08
Mind Controlled Robots http://www.extremetech.com/extreme/132389real-life-avatar-the-first-mind-controlled-robot-surrogate
Surrogates (2009) http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0986263/plotsummary

AUTHORS PROFILE
Sumit Ghulyani is presently a final year student pursuing
degree in Bachelor of Technology in the field of Computer
Science Engineering from Dronacharya College of
Engineering, Gurgaon, India. Other than being the
campus ambassador for a couple of organisations, he has
been one of the soul limbs in successfully coordinating &
hosting technical events with Microsoft and HRs of various
other technical giants. Authored a couple of research
papers, the fields of his research interest include Brain Computer Interface,
Windows Operating Systems, Apple MAC OS, Android Operating Systems,
Wireless Power Transmission Artificial Intelligence & Virtual Reality. Email:
sumit.ghulyani@live.com, GSM: +91-9910550618
Yashasvi Pratap is a final year student pursuing degree in
Bachelor of Technology in the field of Computer Science
Engineering from Dronacharya College of Engineering,
Gurgaon, India. Being a fresh seed in the field of research,
his major interests include Computer Mediated Reality and
Ubiquitous Computing. He is actively engaged in other
activities which include interest in world geography,
historical
timeline
&
zoology.
Email:
yashasvi000pratap@gmail.com, GSM: +919968052498
Sumit Bisht is a final year student pursuing degree in
Bachelor of Technology in the field of Computer Science
Engineering from Dronacharya College of Engineering,
Gurgaon, India. A soul coordinator for several technical &
cultural events at college, he never halts at thriving for the
best. Stepping forward to publish his second work of
brilliance, his major interests include Programming
Paradigms, ATM Networks & Wireless Computing. Email:
sumitbisht@live.com, GSM: +919968803069
Ravideep Singh is a final year student pursuing degree in
Bachelor of Technology in the field of Computer Science
Engineering from Dronacharya College of Engineering,
Gurgaon, India. Other than his proficiency in learning
foreign languages, his major interests include Distributed
Operating Systems, Artificial Intelligence & Neural
Networks.
Email:
ravideep_singh@live.com,GSM:
+919891912029

32 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

