(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 8, No. 12, 2017

Integration of Wearable Smart Sensor for Improving
e-Healthcare
Vijey Thayananthan and Abdullah Basuhail
Department of Computer Science
King Abdulaziz University
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia

Abstract—Analyzing health conditions using sensors is one of
the daily activities in a healthcare organization. The purpose of
this research is to improve the e-healthcare formulated through
the integration of wearable smart sensors and miniaturized
devices. In this research, monitoring glucose level of the diabetic
is considered as an example of the non-linear problem in which
we show that accuracy and efficiency of e-healthcare can be
achieved through Multiple-input, multiple-output (MIMO)
system. In this novel technique, Pn-manifolds, which are the nonlinear mathematical approach, provide the flexible rate and
enhance the accuracy and efficiency of the medical systems in the
e-healthcare services.
Keywords—Smart sensors; miniaturized devices; e-healthcare
applications; MIMO; manifolds

I.

INTRODUCTION

Sensors and miniaturized devices enhance the e-healthcare
facilities in many ways. Since they have started to collect the
information, healthcare units use them in either inside or
outside of the human body. In most of the e-healthcare
application, smart sensors which are the advanced version of
the absorbing (receiving), storing and transmitting device or
machine, can be utilized in many different cases such as
monitoring patients‘ continuous fitness. Thus, we studied the
integration of wearable sensors for monitoring patients [1]. A
comprehensive understanding of the MIMO wireless network
provides us for establishing the wireless body area network,
and the way in which information of the wrist, knee, and ankle
could be used to improve patient care via wearable sensors [2].
When the efficient framework is available at home, healthcare
facilities for elders will be manageable quickly [3]. Despite
remote monitoring, e-healthcare helps healthcare units to avoid
all complex problems and provides the best performance of
services.
Miniaturized medical devices based on nanotechnology and
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) computers provide implantable
facilities. In e-healthcare application, miniaturization is a future
innovation technology because it allows healthcare units to use
the integration of wearable sensors. Further, medical devices
with smaller, superior features and capabilities, are a revolution
for motivating the next generation of the e-healthcare system.
Our contributions which focus on e-healthcare applications
based on the miniaturized devices, communication network
and integration of wearable sensors are summarized below.

A theoretical model of a healthcare system based on MIMO
wireless channel which is the extension and advanced version
of the basic wireless channels. Here, integration of wearable
smart sensor (IWSS) plays an important role to reach the
maximum e-healthcare facilities and benefits.
We have focused on the enhancements of benefits such as
accuracy obtained from the selected example which is the
popular e-health application (diabetes) over MIMO network
and IWSS. According to [4]-[8], people who have diabetes of
Type 1 and 2 take-ups a number of recovery actions such as
medications. Despite all possible actions, diabetic are suffering
from serious attacks created by diabetes. Here, patients may
wear an acquired jacket which transfers all the symptoms
through the integrated sensors. The theoretical model
demonstrates the proposed scheme is highly efficient when we
use the novel approach which deals with MIMO scheme.
In this research, the overall performance of e-healthcare
application involved with MIMO communication is
considered. Minimizing errors during the medical tests or
examination procedures will improve the accuracy and
efficiency of the e-healthcare technology. Efficient design and
analysis allow us to minimize the errors of the e-healthcare
applications when the proposed technique, which uses the
novel approach of MIMO channel with feedback and Pnmanifold is employed in medical communication [9]. Here, the
Pn-manifold influenced with the channel matrix is used for
calculating best resolution and quantization, which provides
the high quality communication channel and flexible rates to
the e-healthcare system.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
focuses on literature review and background. In Section III, we
provide details of sensors used in e-healthcare. Section IV
explains the proposed model and brief methodology of the
proposed scheme. Theoretical analysis of the e-healthcare
services obtained from the selected e-health application
(diabetes) is organized in Section V. In Section VI, overall
conclusions are written based on the theoretical analysis and
results.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW AND BACKGROUND
Regarding the e-healthcare applications, we have
extensively studied the uses of the Pn-manifold [9] and how it
has been designed to improve the accuracy, rate and
connectivity performance of the wireless communication
systems. The MIMO system needs Pn-manifold because it

389 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 8, No. 12, 2017

According to [10], applications of the e_healthcare system
depend on the efficient system architecture which includes
latest key technologies, Internet of things and big health system
influenced with human-cloud integration [11], [12]. Design and
performance analysis of wireless body sensor network allows
patients to improve the e_healthcare problems at different
levels through android [13]. There are many wearable sensors
such as Neurosky, ABM-B-Alert, Quasar, NeuroelectricsEnobio, SmartCap Nia2, Melon, Zeo and Emotiv-epocneuroheadset as described in [14].
Continuous glucose monitoring is also dependent on the
diabetic‘s activities which include the physical exercises and
diet controls during the day or specific time [15]. Healthcare
units provide latest monitoring facilities, but continuous online
solutions and treatment depend on the advice of the medical
professionals and level of the glucose.
A wearable UHF RFID-based EEG system allows patients
in the healthcare units to keep all the mobile facilities which
can be adaptable [16]. Further, some valid healthcare solutions
[17] are proposed for developing a mobile healthcare system
that includes the network devices and machines. Despite the
Wireless Body LAN network for health monitoring, uses of the
sensors between the implanted device and external devices
have been integrated. According to [18], wearable
electroencephalogram systems not only identify the heart
problems but also monitor all the heart-related symptoms and
transfer the e-healthcare units.
Using real-time and secure health monitoring systems,
patients get all the facilities quickly and securely [19]. A full
framework is proposed for a remote brain-machine interface
(RMBI) system that uses a wearable headband with dry
electrodes EEG nano-sensors with Bluetooth functionality [20],
[21]. Further, RBMI system helps elderly people to improve
their basic skills in the e_healthcare applications. Here,
healthcare unit uses EEG signals acquired through tethered and
portable sensor systems.
According to [22], remote monitoring of e-healthcare
services such as patients‘ health and personal records can be
handled through the IWSS. Hospitals in a remote area may not
have that many interactions which not only increases the
unnecessary costs but also reduces the accuracy of the
performance related to the patient‘s monitoring systems.
Remote monitoring of elderly people‘s fitness and other ehealthcare services can be analyzed through the virtual MIMObased wireless communication [23]. Mobile hospitals are also
growing in western countries, and they reduce the costs and
time.
Everywhere, uses of devices such as phones increase the
facilities of the e-healthcare services such as healthcare
information and administrations. As shown in Fig. 1, uses of e-

healthcare sensors (devices) in cities, remote areas and others
(space and underwater) are varied with types of cares, which
allow us to calculate the overall cost per treatment.
Treatment using sensors

reduces the complexity and power consumptions. This research
depends on quick response time known as the warning time
that should save the patient‘s life. Therefore, Pn-manifold is
considered as a novel approach and chosen to increase the
response time. Further, it provides the better resolution and
spectrum which can be achievable using the rank concept of
Pn-manifold matrix and its computation.

12000
10000
8000
6000
4000

City

2000

Remote

0

Others

e-Healthcare Integrated with sensors
Fig. 1. Estimate treatments/day using wearable system integrated with
sensors.

According to the recent news, e-healthcare systems have
been practiced for a decade, but still, they are growing with
wearable smart sensor facilities. New technologies are also
open many directions to implement the e-healthcare
applications in the latest style with multiple environments.
Despite the IWSS in medical communication, e-healthcare is
not only used for clinical applications but also it is
implemented in other medical administrations. Based on [24],
Content-Centric Network (CCN) helps not only to improve the
e-healthcare, but it also allows us to develop a framework over
5G which is the primary enabler for e-healthcare applications.
Further, it solves many existing problems such as the traffic,
packet loss, etc. Since this CCN router provides the caching
capability, proposed framework has become popular in all
services used in e-healthcare applications. Although mobile
Internet developers are the main customers for e-healthcare
services, m-health solutions using bio-monitoring sensor
should be added to the mobile healthcare environments [25]. In
mobile healthcare, integration of wearable smart sensor in
medical communication will navigate our body with all
facilities while we are on the move.
III. SENSORS IN ELECTRONIC HEALTHCARE
In e-healthcare applications, sensors have been widely used
in many aspects such as analyzing temperature. Healthcare
technology uses the tiny machines as sensors which take
maximum roles in all aspects of the medical and healthcare
systems. It helps everybody from basic inquiry level to the
final operation or surgery stage through medical
communication. Currently, key challenges focusing on
communication technology are growing in e-healthcare
applications. Since healthcare facilities have modern
approaches, medical professionals utilize the miniaturization of
medical equipment used in the organs that are not functioning
properly. Also, other challenges such as efficiency of surgery
through online and patient safety can be implemented through

390 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 8, No. 12, 2017

IWSS. There are plenty of other challenges in medical history
because diseases will never end and change to different form.
A. Smart Sensors
Sensors consist of absorbing elements such as
photoelectric, ultrasonic and some chemical substances which
release the absorbed reaction when the e-healthcare application
is present. Some sensors consist of impedance such as
inductive and capacitive. In IWSS, a number of smart sensors
collect necessary medical information and exchange data
related to healthcare in all environments. Both smart and
conventional sensors simply take the reactions and symptoms
of the patients‘ conditions which could be physical, biological
or chemical input and convert them to the measured value in a
digital format.
Smart sensors are a combination of both small memory and
physical connection which is able to communicate with the
signal processor and data network [26]. They produce the
electrical output when the electronic circuit is combined with
interfacing. Smart sensors are upgraded version of the
traditional sensors embedded with current technology which
includes the Bio and Nano processing, SDN switching, etc.
Flexible and reliable smart sensors are required in order to
observe the energy which depends on the density of blood.
Although there are many types of sensors used widely for
many applications, IWSS improves the healthcare technology.
Further, IWSS provides the quick decision which allows
healthcare units to deliver the correct actions to all patients.
Thus, smart sensors are required to measure and maintain the
up to date healthcare information.
B. Biosensors
In medical applications, scientists use biosensors which
observe all characteristics of human organs‘ actions and
reactions. It can be integrated with modern technologies which
are powerful to speed the procedures. Diabetes symptoms of
the blood samples should have more glucose molecules within
the fixed volume of the blood vessels. Biosensors integrated
with smart sensors, and other medical devices can provide
natural facilities to collect a lot of information related to
glucose molecules during the molecular communication [27].
Molecular communication is already invented and verified with
text messages received through the biosensors used within the
specific organ.
C. Sensors in Wireless Networks
Based on the current e_healthcare applications and wireless
network, we all believe that sensors are the most important to
take the quick decisions. Current e-health applications depend
on the wireless networks such as WLAN, WiFi, WiMax. The
sensors integrated with the wireless network are also available
in a healthcare environment where wireless sensors network
(WSN) have been applied most of the e-health applications.
Wearable smart sensor integrated within medical
communication systems used in e-healthcare applications can
be categorized into three different forms; observing and testing
equipment, controlling units and communication systems. In

this research, IWSS involved with miniaturized communication
devices (MCD) is used for internal and external data
interfacing. The internal data interfacing unit must be MCD
because it should be within or around the specific organ. The
external data interfacing unit may be MCD or other existing
devices which depend on the healthcare situation and
environments. Instead of using wearable sensors, the MCD can
be designed using smart sensors intelligently [28]. Although
MCD has many intelligent approaches in the e-healthcare
applications, the goal is that the miniaturized sensor is able to
be engaged in multiple environmental conditions which allow
the healthcare units to monitor and note multiple
measurements [29].
A basic MIMO configuration has N ≥ 2 transmitters and
M≥2 receivers, which use the feedback link with manifolds
considered with evidence of non-linear phenomena. Further,
body-worn distributed MIMO system, which is introduced in
[30] which provides wireless LAN (WLAN) capabilities for
improving e-healthcare applications. In this distributed MIMO
system, MIMO configuration has N = 2 and M = 3 antennas.
Appropriate MIMO configurations and their transmission
capabilities over multiple channels are essential to improve the
e-healthcare facilities. Wireless healthcare system based on
MIMO allows healthcare units to reduce the interferences
when body area network integrated with sensors is employed in
e-healthcare [31]. Despite the advantages of MIMO, accuracy,
and optimization of monitoring all medical tests in e-healthcare
applications depend on the novel design of the theoretical
model. Here, the greatest testing advantage is that MIMO
system uses the efficient design which focuses on feedback and
Pn-manifold. Further, it provides high quality e-healthcare
technologies with low-cost because it uses less energy
consumption depending on better spectrum, and resolution.
Comparing a legacy system of healthcare monitoring, mobile
IWSS needs efficient signal detection depended on MIMO
when multiple problems related to e-healthcare are analyzed
with some form of priority such as an emergency.
IV. PROPOSED TECHNIQUE
As shown in Fig. 2, we have proposed a theoretical model
as a novel technique which provides the accurate measurement
of Type 2 diabetes (non-insulin-dependent diabetes) when we
test the glucose level of Type 2 diabetic.
A. Theoretical Model
As a method, a theoretical model which enables us to
analyze the e-healthcare problems through the appropriate
MIMO communication channel is proposed. This novel
approach supports us to verify the medical communication
capabilities and allows us to evaluate the performance of the ehealthcare facilities. In this theoretical model, a non-linear
mathematical approach based on Pn-manifold plays an
important role to improve the communication facilities of the
e-healthcare system.

k BT
2

(2)

391 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 8, No. 12, 2017

Application
Healthcare

Health education

Health admin

Clinical & others

Infrastructure with interfacing unit

MIMO wireless network

Encoding
&
precoding

MIMO Receiver

Data differentiator

MIMO Transmitter

Emergency
Organization

Decoder

Interface between
affected organ and
Miniaturized
Devices
Feedback channel

IWSS
Symptoms of e-healthcare
application from affected organ
which has smart sensor

Sensors used in
healthcare places

Mobile sensors within the
healthcare environments

Fig. 2. Theoretical model of healthcare system based on MIMO.

In Fig. 2, application part contains all the e-healthcare
applications. Then we use the infrastructure of the interfacing
unit which is responsible for transferring data from MIMO
network to healthcare unit where all applications are focused.
Finally, all sensors in IWSS collect appropriate information
from the patients and send through the MIMO network which
passes the messages to applications and emergencies according
to the situations. In order to verify our proposed model, we
have considered glucose monitoring of diabetes as an example.
In this model, a non-linear mathematical approach, which is the
Pn-manifold, plays an important role in improving the accuracy
of glucose monitoring. The Pn-manifold considered in the
MIMO communication channel have to be employed to make
an efficient mobile IWSS could be used in all environments.
An intuitive sense of patients and their disease and symptoms
related to diabetes can be identified through the IWSS
accurately and quickly. In all environments, the response time
of each glucose level monitoring is very quick which helps to
improve the e-healthcare.
B. Method of Monitoring Glucose Levels
Glucose sensors embedded with IWSS detect the start and
end points of the blood vessel where start and end points are
fixed (assume that fixed length is 3 cm). Within these points,
the same volume of blood samples for different situations such

as blood before the meal, after the meal can be monitored.
According to the theory of diabetic patient, when the glucose
level is increased, the density of blood is also increased. Blood
flowing through this vessel is time-dependent as well as water
pump. Blood flowing rate depends on the glucose level, and
other factors such as body, mass and index (BMI) and it is
different in various situations. Glucose sensors will determine
the blood type as well as monitor a glucose level of the diabetic
patient without pricking the patient‘s body many times. Our
intention is that diabetic patients should get a better solution
through this model which will look after their body with their
normal daily life.
As Einstein predicted particle in the living cell would
behave just like a molecule in solution. The Brownian particle
would diffuse according to a simple (1). Using this concept,
displacement of the particle in molecular communication D is
given as

D

 k BTRt 


6



(1)

Where, k B is the Boltzmann‘s constant and T is the
temperature of the molecular communication,  is the

392 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 8, No. 12, 2017

viscosity of the liquid used in the e-healthcare application. In
MCD development using molecular particles, R is the size of
the particle and t is time. In this theoretical model, minimum
energy is also important when MCD is designed. Using (1),
scientists know that molecules' kinetic energy
depends on temperature. Sensors collect the average energy of
the diabetic in various points.

recordings of glucose concentrations from the diabetic after the
lunch.

Albert Einstein‘s famous formula E = mC² can be used as a
theory which formulates a theoretical model of measuring the
glucose level in the blood. Here, E, m, C are energy, mass, the
speed of the light respectively. In blood vessels, volume (v) of
pure blood can be measured using m = dv, where d is the
density of pure blood. If blood has sugar, the density of blood
will be high. So mass will be increased, and energy will be
calculated using E = dvC². Using light wave and IWSS, which
measures the energy levels, it will be very helpful to test the
sugar level reading. If the energy level exceeds the threshold
limit, we can say that sugar level is high. Otherwise, the
glucose level is normal. Here, blood flow rate can also be
considered with time-dependent data and information. As far as
the MIMO operation and its non-linear functions are
concerned, the proposed model can measure the e-healthcare
problems efficiently and accurately. Here, complex channel
matrix of MIMO system can be optimized through feedback
and Pn-manifold of MIMO approach.

Fig. 3. Accuracy comparison during the daytime.

C. Pn-manifold
In this theoretical model, e-healthcare data from any
application is sent through the MIMO channels and fed back to
MIMO transmitter from the MIMO receiver. Here, feedback
channel characterized by the Pn-manifold provides a better
resolution which reduces the quantization noise through lowcomplex non-linear matrices. Further, Pn-manifold is used for
optimizing quantization, which allows healthcare staffs to see
the accurate test details of the patients. Basically, quality of the
channels is dependant on the Pn-manifolds which determine
the achievable rates of the channels.
Evidence of the Pn-manifold in communication systems
studied in the literature review proved that accuracy of the
channel performance based on the MIMO scheme was better
than the existing approach when we employed the correct type
of Pn-manifold. Therefore, our proposed model will allow us to
improve the accuracy of the medical systems and e-healthcare
applications.
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Accuracy depends on the efficient design which contains
MIMO with Pn-manifold as a novel approach. In these results,
we have considered proposed and conventional schemes in two
different periods within 24 hours. Fig. 3 shows the glucose
levels between the period of time 2:00 and 12:00. Despite
many monitoring devices, the responding time of each test
takes a long time in conventional techniques. As far as this
responding time is concerned, the proposed model produces the
results quickly and accurately.
Diabetes can take different types of medications according
to the level of glucose, which depends on the food, activities,
etc. As shown in Fig. 4, healthcare units have obtained some

Fig. 4. Accuracy comparison during the evening and night.

In automation set with SCADA (supervisory control and
data acquisition) in the e-healthcare, IWSS plays an important
role in increasing network connections for multiple features
network management such as Quality of service and reliability.
Real-Time and secure wireless health monitoring is also part of
the processing used in the e-healthcare system. Despite all
facilities, monitoring devices such as blood pressure and heart
rate monitor are considered as machines, which are motivating
all the services used in the e-healthcare organization.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Through this theoretical model, we have studied the
integration of the wearable smart sensors in medical
communication and verified the accuracy as a performance of
the selected e-healthcare application which is diabetes. Further,
the proposed theoretical model can be employed to most of the
e-healthcare applications in all environments and situations.
Despite many healthcare facilities, IWSS with MIMO scheme
provides maximum accuracy and better e-healthcare solutions

393 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 8, No. 12, 2017

to all diabetics. In order to improve the healthcare monitoring,
the miniaturized device can be inserted into certain part of the
body through the injection. Beside it is simple to use without
many pricking pains per day, it reduces the overall cost and
allows the patients and e-healthcare units/system to monitor the
glucose level continuously.
Although the wearable jacket with many sensors provides
dynamic monitoring facilities, mobile patients are still
struggling to detect their health problems. Thus, IWSS detects
all the symptoms accurately, quickly and efficiently. Hence,
the diabetics take insulin tablets regularly to stimulate their
metabolic rate. In this novel proposed approach, efficient
communication is established through the MIMO system with
Pn-manifold and feedback. In the future work, we can consider
dynamic power management in e-healthcare [32] which allows
researchers to minimize the overall energy and expenses in all
e-healthcare applications. Here, adaptive packet size selection
for IoT and smart sensors will play an important role in
improving the e-healthcare services.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded by the Deanship of Scientific
Research (DSR), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, under
grant No. (D1435-701-611). The authors, therefore,
acknowledge with thanks, DSR technical and financial support.
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

REFERENCES
Baig, Mirza Mansoor, Hamid Gholamhosseini, Aasia A. Moqeem,
Farhaan Mirza, and Maria Lindén. "A systematic review of wearable
patient monitoring systems–current challenges and opportunities for
clinical adoption." J. Med. Syst. 41, no. 7 (2017): 115.
Wang, Stephen, Yilin Ji, David Gibbins, and Xuefeng Yin. "Impact of
dynamic wideband MIMO body channel characteristics on healthcare
rehabilitation of walking." IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation
Letters 16 (2017): 505-508.
Taleb, Tarik, Dario Bottazzi, Mohsen Guizani, and Hammadi NaitCharif. "ANGELAH: a framework for assisting elders at home." IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 27, no. 4 (2009): 480494.
Peters, Anne L., Andrew J. Ahmann, Tadej Battelino, Alison Evert, Irl
B. Hirsch, M. Hassan Murad, William E. Winter, and Howard Wolpert.
"Diabetes Technology—Continuous Subcutaneous Insulin Infusion
Therapy and Continuous Glucose Monitoring in Adults: An Endocrine
Society Clinical Practice Guideline." The Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology & Metabolism 101, no. 11 (2016): 3922-3937.
Lee, Hyunjae, Tae Kyu Choi, Young Bum Lee, Hye Rim Cho, Roozbeh
Ghaffari, Liu Wang, Hyung Jin Choi et al. "A graphene-based
electrochemical device with thermoresponsive microneedles for diabetes
monitoring and therapy." Nature nanotechnology (2016).
Levine, Jason C., Edith Burns, Jeffrey Whittle, Raymond Fleming, Paul
Knudson, Steve Flax, and Howard Leventhal. "Randomized trial of
technology-assisted self-monitoring of blood glucose by low-income
seniors: improved glycemic control in type 2 diabetes mellitus." Journal
of behavioral medicine 39, no. 6 (2016): 1001-1008.
Kumpatla, S., & Viswanathan, V. (2017). ‗Diabetes and tuberculosis‘–a
co-epidemic of public health importance in the developing world.
CURRENT SCIENCE, 113(7), 1296-1302.
Hongasandra, N. R., More, P., Kumar, V., Jagannathan, A., &
Raghuram, N. (2017). The effectiveness of yoga for patients with
diabetes mellitus. CURRENT SCIENCE, 113(7), 1337-1353.
Krishnamachari R T, Varanasi M K.(2014), MIMO systems with
quantized covariance feedback. IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing; 62: 485–495.

[10] Ma, Yujun, Yulei Wang, Jun Yang, Yiming Miao, and Wei Li. "Big
Health Application System based on Health Internet of Things and Big
Data." IEEE Access (2016).
[11] Y.-J. Ma, Y. Zhang, O. M. Dung, R. Li, and D.-Q. Zhang, ―Health
internet of things: recent applications and outlook,‖ Journal of Internet
Technology, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 351–362, 2015.
[12] M. Chen, Y. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, and C.-H. Youn, ―Wearable 2.0:
Enable human-cloud integration in next generation healthcare system,‖
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 11, 2016.
[13] Aguirre, E., Lopez-Iturri, P., Azpilicueta, L., Rivarés, C., Astrain, J.J.,
Villadangos, J. and Falcone, F., 2016. Design and performance analysis
of wireless body area networks in complex indoor e-Health hospital
environments for remote patient monitoring. International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks, 12(9), p.1550147716668063
[14] Balanou, Evangelia, Mark van Gils, and Toni Vanhala. "State-of-the-art
of wearable EEG for personalized health applications." In PHealth 2013:
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Wearable Micro
and Nano Technologies for Personalized Health, vol. 189, p. 119-124.
IOS Press, 2013
[15] Toschi, E., and Wolpert, H., Utility of Continuous Glucose Monitoring
in Type 1 and Type 2 Diabetes. Endocrinology and metabolism clinics
of North America, 45(4), 2016, pp.895-904.
[16] Dementyev, Artem, and Joshua R. Smith. "A wearable UHF RFIDbased EEG system." In RFID (RFID), 2013 IEEE International
Conference on, pp. 1-7. IEEE, 2013.
[17] Jung, Sang-Joong, Risto Myllylä, and Wan-Young Chung. "Wireless
machine-to-machine healthcare solution using android mobile devices in
global networks." IEEE Sensors Journal 13, no. 5 (2013): 1419-1424.
[18] Lin, C-T., L-W. Ko, M-H. Chang, J-R. Duann, J-Y. Chen, T-P. Su, and
T-P. Jung. "Review of wireless and wearable electroencephalogram
systems and brain-computer interfaces–a mini-review." Gerontology 56,
no. 1 (2009): 112-119.
[19] Dagtas, S., Pekhteryev, G., Sahinoglu, Z., Cam, H., & Challa, N. (2008).
Real-Time and Secure Wireless HealthMonitoring. USA: Hindawi
Publishing Corporation, International Journal of Telemedicine and
Applications.
[20] Balanou, Evangelia, Mark van Gils, and Toni Vanhala. "State-of-the-art
of wearable EEG for personalized health applications." In PHealth 2013:
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Wearable Micro
and Nano Technologies for Personalized Health, vol. 189, p. 119-124.
IOS Press, 2013.
[21] Shyamkumar, Prashanth, Sechang Oh, Nilanjan Banerjee, and Vijay K.
Varadan. "A wearable remote brain machine interface using
smartphones and the mobile network." In Advances in Science and
Technology, vol. 85, pp. 11-16. Trans Tech Publications, 2013.
[22] Qureshi, Muhammad Shuaib, and Vijey Thayananthan. "Self-Optimized
Routing Algorithm for mHealth and Remote Health Monitoring."
Journal of Medical Imaging and Health Informatics 6, no. 1 (2016): 189193.
[23] Joonhyung Kim, Donghyuk Han, Jong-Moon Chung, (2010),―Virtual
MIMO Based Wireless Communication for Remote Medical Condition
Monitoring,‖ Aging Friendly Technology for Health and Independence
Lecture Notes in Computer Science Volume 6159, pp 259-262.
[24] Lal, Kumari Nidhi, and Anoj Kumar. "E-health application over 5G
using Content-Centric networking (CCN)." In IoT and Application
(ICIOT), 2017 International Conference on, pp. 1-5. IEEE, 2017.
[25] Hu, Fei, Yang Xiao, and Qi Hao. "Congestion-aware, loss-resilient biomonitoring sensor networking for mobile health applications." IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 27, no. 4 (2009): 450465.
[26] Nihtianov, Stoyan, Zhichao Tan, and Boby George. "New Trends in
Smart Sensors for Industrial Applications-Part I." IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics 64, no. 9 (2017): 7281-7283.
[27] Tadashi Nakano, Andrew W. Eckford, and Tokuko Haraguchi, (2013)
"Molecular Communication," Cambridge University Press, United
Kingdom, ISBN 978-1-107-02308-6 (hardback).
[28] Yapici, Murat Kaya, and Tamador Elboshra Alkhidir. "Intelligent
Medical Garments with Graphene-Functionalized Smart-Cloth ECG
Sensors." Sensors 17, no. 4 (2017): 875.

394 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 8, No. 12, 2017
[29] Colomer-Farrarons, J., Miribel-Català, P., Samitier, J., Arundell, M., &
Rodr‫ي‬guez, I. (2009). Design of a miniaturized electrochemical
instrument for in- situ O2 monitoring. (Proceedings Paper), VLSI
Circuits and Systems IV, Microtechnologies for the NewMillennium,
Vol. 7363, Spie‘09.
[30] Ouyang, Yuehui, David J. Love, and William J. Chappell. "Body-worn
distributed MIMO system." IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology 58, no. 4 (2009): 1752-1765.

[31] M. Jayasheela and A. Rajeswari, (2012), ―Improved Successive
Interference Cancellation for MIMO/UWB-Based Wireless Body Area
Network,‖ International Journal of Antennas and Propagation Volume
2012.
[32] Chen, Xi, Ming Ma, and Anfeng Liu. "Dynamic power management and
adaptive packet size selection for IoT in e-healthcare." Computers &
Electrical Engineering (2017).

395 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

