(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

Anti-noise Capability Improvement of Minimum
Energy Combination Method for SSVEP Detection
Omar Trigui

Wassim Zouch

Advanced Technologies for Medicine and Signals ‘ATMS’,
ENIS, Sfax University, Tunisia

King Abdulaziz University (KAU) Jeddah, Saudi Arabia

Mohamed Ben Messaoud
Advanced Technologies for Medicine and Signals ‘ATMS’,
ENIS, Sfax University, Tunisia
Abstract— Minimum energy combination (MEC) is a widely
used method for frequency recognition in steady state visual
evoked potential based BCI systems. Although it can reach
acceptable performances, this method remains sensitive to noise.
This paper introduces a new technique for the improvement of
the MEC method allowing ameliorating its Anti-noise capability.
The Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) and the moving
average filter were used to separate noise from relevant signals.
The results show that the proposed BCI system has a higher
accuracy than systems based on Canonical Correlation Analysis
(CCA) or Multivariate Synchronization Index (MSI). In fact, the
system achieves an average accuracy of about 99% using real
data measured from five subjects by means of the EPOC
EMOTIVE headset with three visual stimuli. Also by using four
commands, the system accuracy reaches 91.78% with an
information-transfer rate of about 27.18 bits/min.
Keywords— Brain-Computer Interface; Steady State Visual
Evoked Potential; Minimum Energy Combination; Empirical Mode
Decomposition.

I.

INTRODUCTION

Severely paralyzed people with neuromuscular disorders
lose the majority or the totality of their movement and
expression abilities. This is the case of people with locked-in
syndrome, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Spinal cord
injury. A Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a tool for
mobility, communication and control assistance which can
provide them with the possibility to interact with their
surroundings [1]. The principle of a BCI is to detect the brain
activity from the scalp and convert it into commands to control
devices such as prosthesis and computers. The control is done
only by thought without any apparent movement. The
electroencephalography (EEG) is usually used in BCI field for
brain activity measurements. This is mainly due to its time
resolution efficient for real-time applications, its low cost
compared to other technics and the possibility to wear an EEG
headset everywhere.
The P300 evoked potentials, the Event-Related
Synchronization and Desynchronization (ERS/ERD) and the
Steady State Visual Evoked Potential (SSVEP) are the most
promising EEG brain activity patterns. SSVEPs are nearsinusoidal waveforms from the occipital area reflecting a visual
stimulation [2]. SSVEP-based BCI systems offer many

advantages: the small number of required electrodes which
makes the equipment cheaper, the no need of a tiring training,
the suitability for almost any person and any environment and
the better resistance face to noise and artifacts compared with
other brain responses [3] [4]. Also, the performances reached
by these systems are very encouraging. For example, F.
Gembler et al. [5] have made an experiment where SSVEP was
used to distinguish one among four possible commands. Ten
subjects from different age ranges participated in the study and
the data were acquired from 8 channels with a sampling rate of
128 Hz. The average accuracy was about 93% which makes
the system functional and useful.
Several processing methods were presented to distinguish
the target at which the subject gazes [6]. For instance, the
Minimum Energy Combination (MEC) method proposed by O.
Friman et al. [7] estimates the signal to noise ratio (SNR)
corresponding to the stimuli frequencies then selects the
frequency that maximizes this quantity. This method was
exploited by N. Chumerin et al. [8] to create an SSVEP-based
BCI game. The task was to navigate an avatar through a maze
using four commands. The average accuracy of six subjects
was about 82.4% which is considered acceptable. Moreover, Z.
Lin et al. [8] use a frequency recognition method based on the
Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA). The essence of this
method is to extract the correlation coefficients between the
EEG signal and the reference signals then to select the
frequency which maximizes this coefficient. Both MEC and
CCA methods offer good performances thanks to the multichannel and multi-harmonics properties. G. Hakvoort et al. [9]
emphasize the usefulness of the multi-channel criterion by
making a comparison between the CCA as a multi-channel
based method and the power spectral density analyses (PSDA)
as a mono-channel based one. The average accuracy of seven
subjects was 47.81% using PSDA and 78.12 using CCA in the
discrimination among seven different frequencies. This result
clearly demonstrates the importance of multi-channel
techniques. On the other hand, despite the solid mathematical
foundations of the CCA and the MEC methods, a comparison
between them shows that the CCA appears to have widely
superior performances. For example, N. Mora et al. [10] make
an experiment where five subjects are asked to gaze at one of
four possible LEDs flickering with different stimulation
frequencies. Data is measured from six different channels then
processed using different discrimination methods. Results

www.ijacsa.thesai.org

393 | P a g e

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

show that CCA method ensures a higher accuracy rate by about
13% than MEC method. In another study results indicate that
the high sensitivity to the noise level of MEC method leads to a
lower accuracy rate [11].
Recently, Y. Zhang et al. [12] designed a new recognition
method based on the multivariate synchronization index (MSI).
The idea is to calculate the synchronization indexes reflecting
the similarity between the EEG data and reference signals
similar to those used in CCA method. Following the same idea,
the frequency which maximizes the synchronization index is
chosen.
The paper presents a novel amelioration of MEC method
for achieving better resistance to noise. The Empirical mode
decomposition and the moving average are used to reject
irrelevant signals. The remaining signals located at the stimuli
and harmonics frequency band are used to recognize the target.
The following section describes the origin of the noise in
the SSVEP signal.
Then the recognition methods are
presented. The new amelioration of MEC method is presented
in section four. To validate the improvement of the modified
method, a comparison with the three methods is carried out.
Finally, section 6 concludes the paper.
II.

SSVEP AND NOISE SOURCES

The SSVEP occurs when a subject gazes at a light source
target flickering with a fixed frequency. It can be detected as a
signal power increase at the same frequency of the stimulus. In
addition, a number of harmonic frequencies multiple of the
principal frequency can be detected [13]. To exploit this
phenomenon, several targets are presented in front of the
subject. Each target flickers with a unique frequency. Besides
one command is assigned to each target. To execute a
command, the subject has to gaze directly at the appropriate
target. Due to the effect of cortical magnification, the quality of
SSVEP increases if the subject gazes directly at a stimulus
object located in the center of his vision field [14] [15].
Likewise, the retinal cones distribution shows that the foveola
located in the center of the visual field is more sensitive to the
light. Therefore, as it was proven by A. González-Mendoza et
al. [16], the amplitude of the SSVEP increases proportionally
with the area size of the visual stimulus. Consequently, the
noise level increases if the stimulus does not exist in the center
of the vision field or if the light intensity is not sufficient. Also,
the choice of a wrong stimulus color can weaken the power of
the SSVEP response [17]. Before performing ameliorations on
the MEC method, the stimulus parameters effect on the
performances of the processing methods is studied. A
comparison of MEC method versus other ones for different
noise levels is investigated.
III.

filter at 50 Hz and 60 Hz. The choice of this equipment is due
to its short preparation time and low price which are important
factors to bring BCI systems into daily life. Furthermore, Epoc
Emotiv headset had shown good performances in SSVEP
based BCI as in Y. Liu et al. [18] study where the accuracy rate
reached 95.83±3.59 % with online application. To cover the
maximum zone of the occipital area, data were obtained from
electrodes T7, T8, P7, P8, O1, and O2 according to the 10/20
international system. In the present study, the chosen
application is the wheelchair navigation command. In the first
experiment, 3 commands are used: one to move forward, one
to turn left, and one to turn right. Thus, the stimulation system
is composed of three LEDs positioned on the left, top, and right
sides of a computer screen. The LEDs are flickering with fixed
frequencies: 8, 9, and 10 Hz respectively and the subject sits
0.6 m far from them. In the second experiment, in order to
improve the information-transfer rate of the system, another
command is added to the system allowing to move backward.
Its appropriate target which flickers at 11 Hz is positioned at
the bottom side of the screen. To ensure the control of the
stimulation frequencies with precision, an electronically device
based on the STM8 microcontroller was used. Subjects were
asked to follow the scenario of the figure 1.

MATERIALS AND EXPERIMENTS

Five healthy male volunteers participated in the study.
Their ages are 28, 30, 30, 34, and 58. None of the subjects had
visual or neurological disorders or a previous experience with
the BCI systems. Subjects were asked to sit in a comfortable
chair in a room with low noise and luminance level and to
avoid any movement. The Epoc Emotiv headset was used to
acquire the EEG signal from the scalp. Data is sampled at 128
Hz within a bandwidth from 0.2 to 45 Hz with a digital notch

Fig. 1. Experimental Scenarios.

The experiment consists of 18 trials. Each one lasts
between 3 and 8 seconds. The first period is an idle one where
EEG signals are not used. At t  t1 a beep sound indicates the
beginning of the trial accompanied by an arrow pointing the
LED to gaze at. At t  t 2 data start to be sent to the

processing bloc. At t  t3 another beep sound triggers
indicating the end of the trial. The feedback is shown on the
screen as an increment in the value of true or false trials
counters.
IV.

METHODS

The recognition techniques in SSVEP-based BCIs are
based on the estimation of a coefficient that reflects the power
of a stimulus frequency in the EEG signal. The frequency that
maximizes this coefficient is considered as the frequency of the
selected target.

www.ijacsa.thesai.org

394 | P a g e

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

A.

MEC method in the SSVEP-based BCI
MEC based method uses the SNR as a clue of the
stimulation frequency. The diagram of figure 2 shows the
different steps of the method.

sin (2π
X=

1
f )
Fs 1

Nt
sin (2π f1)
[
Fs

cos (2π

1
f )
Fs 1

…

cos (2π

Nt
f )
Fs 1

…

⋮

sin (2π

1
N f )
Fs h n

sin (2π

Nt
N f )
Fs h n

⋮

cos (2π
⋮
cos (2π

1
N f )
Fs h n


Nt
Nh fn )
]
Fs

Fs is the sampling frequency, N t is the number of
samples, and f1 ... f n are the stimulation frequencies.
In the second step, the principal component analysis (PCA)
is utilized to find a linear combination minimizing the variance
of the matrix Ÿ. The application of this linear combination on
the original matrix Y allows the creation of the matrix S with
a reduced noise level.
In the following steps, the SNR values, as described in
equation 3, are measured then the stimulus frequency that
maximizes the SNR is considered as the frequency of interest.

SNR( f )  P( f ) /  ( f ) 
Fig. 2. Block diagram of the MEC method.

The EEG signal yi (t ) is represented by a linear model
following the equation (1).
yi (t ) 

N h 1

a
k 1

i ,k

sin(2kft  i ,k )   (bi , j  z j (t ))  ei (t )
j





Where P( f ) is the signal power function and
an estimation of the noise power.

 ( f ) is

B.

CCA method in the SSVEP-based BCI
The CCA allows to compare two groups of variables in
order to know if they describe the same phenomenon. In the
SSVEP-based BCI, the CCA is used for a comparison between
the multi-channel EEG signals and a reference signal R f i

including the stimulus frequencies and the harmonics.

Where i is the unique electrode identifier, N h is the

 sin(2f i (t )) 


 cos(2f i (t )) 

R fi  

 sin(2N f (t )) 
h i


 cos(2N f (t )) 
h i



number of harmonics, and f is the stimulation frequency.

The model is decomposed into the sum of three quantities.
The first one defines the frequencies of interest where ai ,k and

i,k are respectively the specific amplitudes and phases, the
second is a nuisance signals z j (t ) such as the artifacts where

bi , j is the weight factor, and the third quantity represents the
noise.
The aim of the two first steps of the block diagram is to
reduce the noise level and to increase the interesting
frequencies level. First of all, the frequencies of interest are
eliminated by projecting the matrix Y of the EEG signal onto
the orthogonal complement of the matrix X containing a pair
of sin(2kft) and cos(2kft) in its columns.
Ÿ = Y − X(X T X)−1 X T Y





Figure 3 depicts the different steps of the CCA based
method. The value of the frequency of interest is the same as
the reference frequency that maximizes the correlation
coefficient.



Where
Ÿ is the matrix of uninteresting signals,

www.ijacsa.thesai.org

395 | P a g e

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

i  

i

P


j 1


j



Where: P is the number of eigenvalues.
Finally, the synchronization index S is defined by the
equation (8).
P

S  1

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the CCA method.

C.

MSI method in the SSVEP-based BCI
The MSI method estimates the synchronization index
between the EEG signal Y and the reference signals R f i .

The correlation matrix between two sets of data Y and R
is given by the equation (5):

C xx
C
C yx

C xy 
C yy 




Where:

C xx 

1
1
1
YY T , C xy  C yx 
YR T , C yy 
RR
M
M
M

and M is the number of samples.
To reduce the effect of the autocorrelation, the following
linear transformation is applied to the matrix C producing the
matrix C̈.
C̈ = UCU T

  12
C
Where: U   xx
 0





0 
1 .

C yy 2 

A normalization of the eigenvalues
given by:


i 1

i




log( i )

log( P)




The S quantity tends towards 0 when Y and R are
increasingly uncorrelated and towards 1 when Y and R are
increasingly correlated. Consequently, the frequency of the
reference which has the maximum synchronization index is
considered as the frequency of interest.
D.

MEC method amelioration
The EEG signals have a poor signal to noise ratio [19]
which makes the brain activity patterns difficult to be detected.
Nevertheless, it is not always possible to discriminate between
the different mental tasks.
The goal of this improvement is to reduce the noise
sensitivity of the MEC method. Considering that interesting
signals are composed of stimulation frequencies and
harmonics, and the rest is noise. The noise sensitivity effect can
be caused by the fact that a part of the noise is considered as
relevant or a part of the interesting signal is considered as
irrelevant. In both cases, the problem is in the separation
between the noise and the interesting signal. Thus, this problem
can be localized in the first step of the MEC method.
The idea of the improvement is to use the empirical mode
decomposition (EMD) to divide the EEG signal into useful and
noise signals instead of using the matrix projection.
The EMD was firstly proposed by Huang et al. [20] as an
efficient method to evaluate the frequency and amplitude of
time-series with excellent time resolution. It divides the
original signal into some Intrinsic Mode Functions (IMF),
which are different scales of oscillation components, and a
residue. The sifting process described as follows leads to
extract each IMF and the residue.
Initially, the first residue and the first difference take the
value of the initial EEG data.

i of the matrix C̈ is

 Step1: Locate the local maxima and minima of the
difference.
 Step2: Calculate the lower and the upper envelop using
these extrema.
 Step3: Calculate the mean by averaging the upper and
the lower envelop.

www.ijacsa.thesai.org

396 | P a g e

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

 Step4: Calculate the new difference by subtracting the
mean from the previous difference.
 Step5: If the stopping criteria are satisfactory, then the
last calculated difference is an IMF, otherwise go to
step1 and continue the process step by step.
 Step6: Calculate the new residue by subtracting the last
IMF from the previous residue.

lower frequency band than the stimulus frequency. This
frequency and its neighbors constitute the frequency band of
the second group. The last one contains the IMFs characterized
by several scattered frequencies higher than the stimulation
frequency.
Figures 5 (A)-(B) illustrate the Normalized Amplitude
Spectrum (NAS) of different IMFs, defined in equation (10).

 Step7: If the new residue is not isometric then repeat the
process from step1. Otherwise, the sifting process is
ended, and the last found residue is considered as the
final residue of the process.
The stopping criteria are a compound of two conditions.
First, the number of extrema and the number of zero crossing
must be either equal or differ by one at most. Second, the
standard deviation (SD) is smaller than a predetermined value.
T

SD 

h
t 0

k 1

(t )  hk (t )

t 0

FFT ( x)
M

 FFT ( x )
i

i 1




Where: x is an IMF time series, FFT (x) is the fast
Fourier transform of x , and M is the number of FFT points.

2



T

 hk21 (t )

NSA( x) 



hi are the vectors of differences; k is the
differences counter and T is the period of considered samples.
Where:

Figure 4 illustrates the result of the sifting process for a
SSVEP signal during the period of 2s.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 4. Decomposition of the original signal in IMFs and a residue.

Each IMF has a higher frequency than the next extracted
one. The residual which is the lowest frequency component
represents the trend of the signal.
The spectral analysis of the IMFs allows to separate them
into three groups. The first contains the IMFs located in a

Fig. 5. Spectral analysis of the IMFs: (A) separation between the three
groups, (B) spectrum of the stimulation frequency group.

The IMFs located in the first group are considered as noise
containing neither stimulation frequencies nor harmonics. To
discriminate between the first and the second group, a
decision-making criterion is required. R. Sharma et al. [21]
have used the sample entropy (SampEn) as a complexity
measure of IMFs extracted from EEG signal. This experiment

www.ijacsa.thesai.org

397 | P a g e

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

shows that the SampEn decreases from one IMF to the next.
Therefore, SampEn can be a good criterion to separate the
IMFs of the first group from the IMFs of the second. Likewise,
IMFs which have a SampEn inferior to a predetermined
threshold are considered as noise components.
After subtracting the IMFs of the first group from the
original signal, the remainder can be considered as interesting
or a mixture between the noise and the interesting signal
according to the level of noise. The central frequency of the
second IMF is in the stimulus frequencies band. Its NAS
indicates the noise level. If the NAS is superior to a
predetermined threshold, the signal to noise ratio is high
enough and the first step of the MEC method is ended.
However, in the second case, a filtering is needed to exclude
the rest of noise while keeping the sharpest EEG signal
response. The moving average filter is optimal for this kind of
issue. In spite of its simplicity, it ensures a low curve shape
change to keep valid the previous decompositions. To produce
each point, some input points are averaging according to the
equation (11).

yi 

1
M

M 1

x
j 0

i j




Where xi is an input point, y i is an output point, and M
is the number of points in the average.
When M increases the noise decreases but the acute curve
angles become obtuse. The best choice of M is about eleven
[22].
V.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

For the comparison purpose, the previously presented
methods were implemented as well as the MEC proposed
amelioration. The experiment results allow to validate the
amelioration.
A.

Separation between noise and interesting signal
The SampEn calculates the probability that epochs of
window length m that are similar within a tolerance r remain
similar at the next point [23]. A study of the different possible
combinations shows that the best values of m and r are 6 and
0.2 respectively. Also, the best choices of the thresholds are 0.1
for the SampEn and 0.08 for the NAS.
Figure 6 reports an example of the extracted noise and
interesting signal from the EEG recording. In the interesting
signal, the stimulus frequency dominates the harmonics
frequencies as it has a higher amplitude response than them [8].
Moreover, it follows the shape of the EEG signal i.e. the
original features are maintained. The Nuisance signal
frequency seems to be higher than the interesting signal as it
includes the artifacts.

Fig. 6. Extracted noise and interesting signal using the proposed
improvement.

B.

Stimuli color effect on different recognition methods
Overlapping over several recording intervals can lead to
improve the precision of the system. In this experiment, five
intervals of a length of 3s each and with a gap of 0.25s were
used. The idle period is fixed to 4s. The experiment consists of
changing the colors of the three used LEDs. The colors are
white, green, red, blue, and yellow. Table 1 illustrates the
impact of the colors on the system accuracy rates using the
processing methods mentioned before. The results show that
the responses of white and yellow colors evoked an accuracy
exceeding the 80%. However, the precisions with red, green, or
blue stimuli are lowest.
The white and the yellow color are the brightest which
explains this result. In fact, D. G. Albrecht et al. [25] examined
the effect of the contrast intensity of the visual stimulation on
neurons from the Visual area one V1 or the striate cortex.
These neurons are sensitive to the object features at which the
subject gazes as the color and the direction. The results show
that the response of a striate cell increases as the contrast
intensifies. The Accuracy rate using a white color is most
stable and high. This consequence justifies the choice of the
white color for the next experiments.
TABLE I.

SSVEP RESPONSES TO STIMULI OF DIFFERENT COLORS
Method
MEC

Color

Yellow
Blue
Green
Red
White

44%
50%
67%
50%
72%

MSI

89%
55%
78%
67%
83%

CCA

72%
55%
78%
67%
83%

C.

Noise level effects on different recognition methods
As explained before, the nature of the light source has a
great effect on the noise level. In the next experiment, two
kinds of white light LEDs are used in order to verify the noise
sensitivity of each method. The first is the universal LEDs with
3mm and the second is the chips on board (COB) LEDs. COB
LEDs embedded ten LEDs in a circular surface with a diameter
of 35mm. Therefore they can produce a sufficient light
intensity without causing fatigue or losing the subject
concentration. The subjects were asked to follow the scenario

www.ijacsa.thesai.org

398 | P a g e

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

of the previous experiment. Figure 7 presents the accuracy
rates of MEC, CCA, and MSI methods for the five subjects
with the 3mm LEDs. It is clear that the high level of noise
leads to decrease the performances of all processing methods.

D.

Application of the proposed improvement
The goal of this experiment is to validate the proposed
improvement procedure of MEC method for the SSVEP
features recognition. The COB LEDs are the light sources. The
study of the average accuracy rates of MEC, CCA, and MSI
methods allows to compare their noise sensitivities as well as
the improved MEC for the five subjects. Three data intervals of
2s with a gap of 0.25s were used to identify the target.
Table 4 summarizes the performances of the different
methods.
TABLE IV.

Fig. 7. SSVEP responses to 3mm LEDs stimuli with different processing
methods.

Table 2 illustrates the percentage of correct recognitions for
each method using 3mm LEDs.
TABLE II.
Method
Accuracy
rate

AVERAGE ACCURACY OF EACH METHOD WITH 3MM LEDS
MEC
75.55%

MSI
77.77%

CCA
81.1%

The MEC responses remain the lowest even if the accuracy
values are close.
In the next section, The COB LEDs replace the universal
ones. Figure 8 illustrates the results of different methods.

Method
Accuracy
rate

RECOGNITION METHODS PERFORMANCE
CCA

MSI

MEC

96.66%

96.66%

83.33%

Improved
MEC
98.88%

The proposed improvement produces more precise results
in selecting the stimulation frequency. It ameliorates the
accuracy of the MEC method by about 13%. Thus, MEC
becomes efficiently resistant to the noise. This method
becomes even more performant than other methods and
reaches 99% with a total recording interval of 2.5s. This
investigation confirms the hypothesis that is using the EMD
and the moving average filter allows to separate noise and
artifact from the interesting signal. EMD decomposes a
nonlinear and nonstationary signal into a sum of IMFs without
the need of prior knowledge. In fact, it is an adaptive technique
depending on the local characteristic of the signal which
explains its compliance with the moving average filter. The
results confirm the validity of the improvement.
E.

Information-transfer rate
One of the most used metrics to evaluate the performance
of BCI systems is the information-transfer rate (ITR). Wolpaw
et al. [26] have proposed the most popular method for ITR
calculation as defined in equation (12).

Fig. 8. The accuracy values with COB LEDs stimuli.

The experimental results show that all methods performed
better using COB LEDs than using 3mm LEDs. Thus, the level
of noise decreases using COB LEDs.
Table 3 illustrates the percentage of correct recognitions for
each method using COB LEDs stimuli.
TABLE III.

AVERAGE ACCURACY OF EACH METHOD WITH COB LEDS

Method
Accuracy rate
(COB LED)
Amelioration value
(%)

MEC
86%

MSI
95.55%

CCA
95.55%

10.28%

22.85%

17.8%

Although the three methods are noise sensitive, MEC
remains largely poorer. This method is influenced even with
little noise levels.

B  log 2 N  P log 2 P  (1  P) log 2 (1  P) /( N  1)





Where B is the ITR (bits/symbol), N is the number of
possible commands and P is the classification accuracy. In
order to make this quantity easier to understand, another ITR
definition Bt in bits/min which is derived from B is generally
used.

Bt  B * (60 / T )





Where T is the average time needed to convert a brain
feature activity into a command.
A higher ITR leads to a better and more natural use of the
system. In fact, this criterion reflects the time during which the
subject has to gaze at the target and the number of commands
needed to reach the destination. In order to foster this criterion,
another light source was added to the stimulation system. Also,

399 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

the idle period and the trial length have gradually been
reduced. Moreover, in order to reduce the number of needed
time intervals, a decision is made as soon as the same target is
identified three times by the system in which the total number
of intervals is equal or less than five. Otherwise, if five-time
intervals are processing without recognizing the target, the trial
is considered as erroneous. Table 5 illustrates a comparison of
the CCA method and the proposed method where the idle
period is equal to 0.5s and the interval is equal to 2s. A lower
interval decreases enormously the accuracy of the system and
obviously increases the time cost needed to fix the wrong
choices.
TABLE V.

MEAN ITR AND ACCURACY AS A FUNCTION OF NUMBER OF
TARGETS FOR CCA AND IMPROVED MEC METHODS
Method
Improved MEC
3 targets
4 targets

Average
accuracy
rate
Average
trial length
Average
informatio
n-transfer
rate
(bits/min)

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

CCA
3 targets

makes the system more suitable for the wheelchair navigation
command.

4 targets

95.5%

91.78%

91.11%

88.14%

3.108s

3.222s

3.046s

3.133s

24.617

27.18

20.944

24.64

[5]

[6]

[7]

The results of this experiment show that the proposed
method remains better even with the new scenario. The system
can reach acceptable performances with four commands.
VI.

[8]

CONCLUSION

Steady State Visual Evoked Potential is the most effective
solution for BCIs in everyday use. Its low required training and
high accuracy rate make its use close to the ordinary one.
Three LEDs with different frequencies (8, 9 and 10 Hz) were
used during the first experiments. Later an additional LED
flickers at 11 Hz was added. Each LED represents a possible
direction to control the navigation of an electric wheelchair.
The EPOC EMOTIVE headset was used to acquire data from
the five volunteers. Only the closest six electrodes to the
occipital area were used. In this study, a new amelioration to
improve the robustness against the noise of the Minimum
Energy Combination method was proposed. Results prove that
the stimulus characteristics have a great impact on the noise
level in the SSVEP signal. The use of COB LEDs allows to
increase the SNR. Also the white color increases the excitation
of neurons from the visual cortex of the brain and allows to
reach the best accuracy values. The Canonical Correlation
Analysis and the Multivariate Synchronization Index based
methods serve as references for comparing their performances
with the performances of the proposed improvement. The
results indicated that the improved MEC method performed
better than the widely used CCA and MSI. The average
accuracy rate reaches 99% and increases by about 13%
compared to the original MEC with a data length of 2.5s using
three targets. Also using four targets, the system reached an
average information-transfer rate of about 27.5 bits/min. This

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]

A. L. S. Ferreira, L. C. de Miranda, E. E. C. de Miranda and S. G.
Sakamoto “A Survey of Interactive Systems based on Brain-Computer
Interfaces”, SBC Journal on 3D Interactive Systems, VOL. 4, NO. 1,
2013, pp 3-13.
M. Middendorf, G. McMillan, G. Calhoun and K. S. Jones “BrainComputer Interfaces Based on the Steady-State Visual-Evoked
Response”, IEEE Transactions on Rehabilitation Engineering, VOL. 8,
NO. 2, 2000, pp 211-214.
W. Yijun, W. Ruiping, G. Xiaorong and G. Shangkai “Brain-computer
Interface based on the High-frequency Steady-stateVisual Evoked
Potential”, First International Conference on Neural Interface and
Control Proceedings, Wuhan, China, 26-28 May 2005, pp 37-39.
Y. Wang, R. Wang, X. Gao, B. Hong and S. Gao “A Practical VEPBased Brain–Computer Interface”, IEEE Transactions on neural systems
and rehabilitation engineering, VOL. 14, NO. 2, 2006, pp 234-239.
F. Gembler, P. Stawicki and I. Volosyak “A Comparison of SSVEPBased BCI-Performance Between Different Age Groups”, 13th
International Work-Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Palma de
Mallorca, Spain, June 10-12 2015, pp 71-77.
Q. Liu, K. Chen, Q. Ai and S. Q. Xie “Review: Recent Development of
Signal Processing Algorithms for SSVEP-based Brain Computer
Interfaces”, Journal of Medical and Biological Engineering, VOL. 34,
NO. 4, 2013, pp 299-309.
O. Friman, I. Volosyak and A. Gräser “Multiple Channel Detection of
Steady-State Visual Evoked Potentials for Brain-Computer Interfaces”,
IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, VOL. 54, NO. 4, APRIL
2007, pp 742-750.
N. Chumerin, N. V. Manyakov, A. Combaz, Ar. Robben, M. vanVliet
and M. M. Van Hulle “Steady State Visual Evoked Potential Based
Computer Gaming – The Maze”, Lecture notes of the Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering, INTETAIN 2011, LNICST VOL. 78, 2012, pp. 28-37.
Z. Lin, C. Zhang, W. Wu and X. Gao “Frequency Recognition Based on
Canonical Correlation Analysis for SSVEP-Based BCIs”, IEEE
transactions on biomedical engineering, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2007,
pp 1172-1176.
G. Hakvoort, B. Reuderink and M. Obbink “Comparison of PSDA and
CCA detection methods in a SSVEP-based BCI-system”, technical
report TR-CTIT-11-03, center for telematics and information
technology, university of twente (2011).
N. Mora, V. Bianchi, I. De Munari and P. Ciampolini “A BCI Platform
Supporting AAL Applications”, 8th International Conference Universal
Access in Human-Computer Interaction, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, June
22-27 2014, pp. 515–526.
W. Nan, C. M. Wong, B. Wang, F. Wan, P. U. Mak, P. I. Mak and M.
Vai “A Comparison of Minimum Energy Combination and Canonical
Correlation Analysis for SSVEP Detection”, the 5th International IEEE
EMBS Conference on Neural Engineering Cancun, Mexico, April 27 May 1 2011, pp 469-472.
Y. Zhang, P. Xu, K. Cheng and D. Yao “Multivariate synchronization
index for frequency recognition of SSVEP-based brain–computer
interface”, Journal of Neuroscience Methods, VOL. 221, 15 January
2014, pp 32– 40.
C. S. Herrmann “Human EEG responses to 1–100 Hz flicker: resonance
phenomena in visual cortex and their potential correlation to cognitive
phenomena”, Experimental Brain Research, NO. 137, Springer-Verlag,
2001, pp 346–353.
F.C. Lin, J. K. Zao, K.C. Tu, Y. Wang, Y.P. Huang, C.W. Chuang, H.Y.
Kuo, Y.Y. Chien, C.-C. Chou and T.P. Jung “SNR Analysis of HighFrequency Steady-State Visual Evoked Potentials from the Foveal and
Extrafoveal Regions of Human Retina”, 34th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society

400 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications,
Vol. 7, No. 9, 2016

[16]
[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]

EMBS, San Diego, California USA, 28 August - 1 September 2012, pp
1810-1814.
E. E. Sutter “The brain response interface: communication through
visually-induced electrical brain responses”, Journal of Microcomputer
Applications VOL. 15, issue 1, 1992, pp 31-45.
A. González-Mendoza, J. L. Pérez-Benítez, J. A. Pérez-Benítez and J.H.
Espina-Hernández “Brain Computer Interface based on SSVEP for
controlling a remote control car”, International Conference on
Electronics, Communications and Computers (CONIELECOMP),
Cholula, 25-27 Feb. 2015, pp 93-97.
A. Duszyk, M. Bierzynska, Z. Radzikowska, P. Milanowski, R. Kus, P.
Suffczynski, M. Michalska, M. Labecki, P. Zwolinski and P. Durka
“Towards an Optimization of Stimulus Parameters for Brain-Computer
Interfaces Based on Steady State Visual Evoked Potentials,” Plos One,
VOL. 9, NO. 11, 2014, pp.11.
Y. Liu, X. Jiang, T. Cao, F. Wan, P. U. Mak, P.-I. Mak and M. I Vai
“Implementation of SSVEP Based BCI with Emotiv EPOC”, IEEE
International Conference on Virtual Environments Human-Computer
Interfaces and Measurement Systems (VECIMS), Tianjin, 2-4 July
2012, pp 34-37.
F. Lotte, M. Congedo, A. Lécuyer, F. Lamarche and B. Arnaldi. “A
review of classification algorithms for EEG-based brain–computer
interfaces,” Journal of Neural Engineering, IOP Publishing, 2007, 4,
pp.24.
N. E. Huang, Z. Shen, S. R. Long, M. C. Wu, H. H. Shih, Q. Zheng,
N.C. Yen, C. C. Tung and H. H. Liu “The empirical mode
decomposition and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary
time series analysis”, Proc. The Royal Society, Lond. A (1998) 454, pp
903–995, Printed in Great Britain.
R. Sharma, R. BilasPachori and U. R. Acharya “Application of Entropy
Measures on Intrinsic Mode Functions for the Automated Identification
of Focal Electroencephalogram Signals”, Entropy, NO. 17, 2015, pp
669-691.
S. Smith “Digital Signal Processing: A Practical Guide for Engineers
and Scientists, 1stEdition” 07 Nov. 2002 pp. 279-280.
D. E. Lake, J. S. Richman, M. P. Griffin and J. Randall Moorman
“Sample entropy analysis of neonatal heart rate variability”, American
Journal of Physiology Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative
Physiology, 1 September 2002 Vol. 283 no. 3, R789-R797.
D. G. ALBRECHT and D. B. HAMILTON “Striate Cortex of Monkey
and Cat: Contrast Response Function” journal of neurophysiology,
Vol.48, No.1, 1982.
J. R. Wolpaw, H. Ramoser, D. J. McFarland, and G. Pfurtscheller
“EEG-Based communication: improved accuracy by response
verification” IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON REHABILITATION
ENGINEERING, VOL. 6, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 1998, pp. 326–33.

401 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

