(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020

Textile EEG Cap using Dry-Comb Electrodes for
Emotion Detection of Elderly People
Fangmeng ZENG1, Panote Siriaraya2, Dongeun Choi3, Noriaki Kuwahara4
Graduate School of Science and Technology, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Kyoto, Japan1,2,3,4
Faculty of Informatics, The University of Fukuchiyama, Kyoto, Japan3

Abstract—Emotions are fundamental to human life and can
impact elderly healthcare encounters between caregiver and
patient. Detecting emotions by monitoring the physical signals
with wearable smart devices offers new promises for care
support. While there are multiple studies on wearable devices,
few of these pertain to soft electroencephalogram (EEG) caps
designed for long-time wear by elderly people. In this study, a 4channel textile cap was designed with dry electrodes held by an
ultra-soft gel holder, while fashion and ergonomic design features
were introduced to enhance wearability and comfort. The dryelectrode textile cap performed highly for monitoring EEG
signals; closely matching the wet electrodes equipment. All
participants reported positive feedback stating that the textile
cap was softer, lighter, and more comfortable than other devices.
A cumulative contribution rate of 72.199% for two factors
(materials properties factor and design pattern factor) was
achieved using the principal factor method (PFA), which are
influencing the usability of the wearable devices. An average
emotion classification accuracy of 81.32% was obtained from 5
healthy elderly subjects. It was thus concluded that the proposed
method provides a stable monitoring and comfortable user
experience for users, and can be used to detect emotions for
elderly people with good results in the future.

brain. Now, with added advancements in affective computing
[5], it’s able to recognize emotions from EEG signals using
diversified classification methods that extract time and
frequency domain features. In the earlier study [6], it’s
successfully achieved that binary emotional changes were
classified using convolutional neural network (CNN) and
achieved an EEG signal accuracy of 90% for two classes on
the arousal level. However, the aim in this study is to develop
an emotion detecting system using EEG collecting devices
that combines accurate signal collection with a comfortable
user-friendly experience for elderly people.

Keywords—EEG monitoring; elderly people; emotion detection;
textile EEG cap; wearing-comfort

One possible gel-free alternative is the use of dry
electrodes to simplify the process. To date, many dryelectrodes EEG devices that take advantage of the low
impedance, high signal quality and comfortable user
experience [10] offered by dry electrodes have been
developed. However, despite the remarkable achievements in
EEG devices using dry electrodes, such as DSI 10/20 by
Quasar, MindWave Mobile 2 by NeuroSky, EPOC+ by
Emotiv, the frames of these devices are often made from
plastic [11] which is bulky, hard, and mechanical; deterring
users from using it [12]. On the other hand, textile frames are
skin-friendly, soft to touch, comfortable to wear and visually
appealing. While many textile caps — such as MCScap by
Medical Computer Systems, and eego by Ant Neuro—which
accurately and consistently monitor the energy signal have
been developed, most of these designs are not user-friendly.
They wrap tightly around the head through the chin and ears,
to ensure the stable contact between the electrode and the
scalp. For long-term use, it causes a sense of restraint and an
uncomfortable pressure. Therefore [13][14], it is necessary to
develop a wearable device for elderly people, which not only
obtains a reliable signal, but is also user-friendly, has an easy
light-weight mounting and un-mounting headset, is
ergonomically designed for extended wear, and is visually

I.

INTRODUCTION

While aging societies are a global phenomenon, with a
population share of 23% in 2009 [1], and an estimated 33%
(one-third) by 2030 [1], Japan has maintained the largest share
and fastest-growing population of persons aged 65 years or
over in the world. This will bring serious challenges to
healthcare and social services. Aging research including
mechanisms of aging, detection of disease, and healthcare
studies are a major theme in Japanese academic universities
and industries. Yet, more research on assessing the quality of
life for elderly people is required to strengthen the healthcare
system.
Emotions play an important role in people’s life,
influencing behavior, cognition, and communication. The
quality of life for humans could be evaluated according to
their emotions. Research on real-time emotion detection using
physiological signals has grown rapidly in recent years. The
electroencephalogram (EEG) in particular, has been key
research focus due to its high accuracy in reflecting emotional
states with objective and comprehensive data [2][3]. Studies
[4] have shown that emotions are strongly connected to the
prefrontal cortex, frontal cortex, and parietal region of the

The traditional EEG system [7] using wet electrodes with a
conductive paste acquires a reliable signal provided there is
good contact between the electrode and the scalp through the
hair. However, this system [8] depends on the help of
professional staff as it takes a long time to clean and prepare
the skin. Moreover, long-term skin contact [9] can cause skin
irritation, leftover residue on the skin, and drying out of the
paste, causing a reduction in signal quality. Overall, wet
electrodes are known to cause discomfort and vexation for
patients, users and researchers, making them not suitable for
extended monitoring, especially for elderly people.

58 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020

appealing. At present, there are limited studies that focus on
these factors.
This paper explains the research methods and processes for
successful development of a comfortable and stylish EEG cap
using dry electrodes for daily monitoring of elderly people.
The performance of the cap is discussed and the emotion
classification on elderly people is also presented. This paper is
organized as follows: Section II explained the design of the
textile cap in detail; In Section III, the experiments on
performance evaluation and emotion detection were presented;
Section IV described the results and discussion of: the signal
quality compared with traditional wet electrodes; the usability
performance compared with other wearable device; the
implementation of emotion detection; Section V drew
conclusions and Section VI summarized the limitations and
provided suggestions in future work.
II. DESIGN OF THE TEXTILE EEG CAP
An overview of the development was presented in this
section. First, the number and position of the electrodes for the
brain cap prototype was determined. A blueprint for a 3D
printed mold was then designed and printed. Subsequently, a
super-soft electrode holder was made using urethane resin,
and a 4-electrode textile brain cap was designed with an
aesthetic focus.
A. The Gel-based Holder Design
The distribution and number of electrodes were
determined based on emotion detection and wearing
experience. The F3, F4, P3, and P4 points distributed in the
frontal and parietal cortex were selected as EEG channels in
accordance with the International 10-20 system.

Fig 1.

The Design of the 3D Printing Mold of the Electrode Holder.

3D printing was done at university. Once the final design
was achieved, the parts were printed using a Polylactic Acid
(PLA) plastic by Value 3D MagiX MF-1000.
2) Development of the ultra-soft gel holder: The ultra-soft
gel made by urethane resin was produced by mixing two
liquids (the base and hardener by a weight ratio of 3:1). The
volume of the mold was calculated before making the gel and
the mold was sprayed with special slide urethane mold
released 1-hour in advance. The production steps were carried
out following the Monotaro platform instructions. Fig. 2
shows the schematic diagram for producing the electrode gel
holder. The gel product exhibits the appropriate level of
elasticity and ultra-softness. As for a 4-channel cap, one-gel
product holding 2 electrodes, 2 gel holders were made.

Reusable dry comb electrodes provided by the OpenBCI
platform were adopted along with 5mm-long blunt prongs
used to accommodate longer hair and enhance scalp contact.
An ultra-soft gel-based electrode holder was introduced to
maintain stable contact between the dry electrodes and the
scalp without strong pressure. A 3D printing mold was needed
to construct the ultra-soft gel-based electrode holder. The
production details of the 3D printing mold are as follows.
1) 3D printing mold design: The average head
circumference of the human adults [15] was estimated at about
55cm in females and 57 cm in males. A medium-sized
prototype based on the average head circumference was
planned. First, we combined the International 10-20 system
measurement [16] to determine the size of the EEG electrode
holder mold. The distance between F3 and F4, P3 and P4, was
set as 100mm. The total length of the mold inside was
150mm, the width inside was 50mm and the height was 8mm.
The size of the two columns was devised based on the
electrode parts. As the human-skin gel has high elasticity and
softness, the bottom diameter was set as 10mm so that the
electrode with the protector could cross smoothly. The top
diameter was set to 5mm to hold the protector firmly. In order
to easily remove the gel, the column height which needed to
be higher than 8mm was settled at 10mm. Fig. 1 shows the
design of a 3D printing mold for the EEG electrode holder.

Fig 2.

The schematic diagram for producing the gel holder.

B. Design of the Textile EEG Cap
With considerations toward comfort, flexibility, and
appearance, a soft textile cap for EEG was put forward as the
main candidate in this research.
An elastic fabric made of rayon (R) 43%, polyester (P)
51%, polyurethane (PU) 6%, was used as a ground cloth to
make a fitted cap based on the average medium head size.
After that, the ultra-soft gel was covered with fabric, two holes
were made on the fabric to set the electrodes, and the fabric
adhered to the cap. The electrodes were crossed through the
holes in the gel holder and the fabric was then connected to
the blue protector with screws. 4 electrodes held separately
with 2 gel holders, created as per above, were then fixed to the
textile cap. The softness and flexibility enabled the gel holder

59 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020

to adjust its shape to fit the head in the same manner as
textiles. The electrodes were then placed on the scalp and
stabilized with the holder. Fig. 3 illustrates the design and
structure of the textile EEG cap equipped with dry electrodes.
III. EXPERIMENTS AND METHODS
This part presents the experiments to evaluate the signal
performance of the designed textile EEG cap and to detect
emotions for elderly people.
A. Experiment I - Textile EEG Cap Testing
A pilot experiment was conducted on healthy young
people to evaluate the signal measuring and usability of the
textile EEG cap. 20 students (13 females and 7 males) took
part in the experiment. Before the experiment, each subject
was asked to measure their head circumference. The head
sizes ranged from (56~58) ± 0.5 cm. The textile EEG cap was
then fitted using the adjustment features. All participants
consented to the content of the experiment.
After the textile cap was set up on their head and the
stability of the signal was checked, the subject was asked to
relax for a moment, and then close their eyes for 4 minutes
and listen to a song. Next, they were asked to open their eyes
for 4 minutes and look at the lyrics while listening to a song.
The EEG signals from frontal and parietal areas (F3, P3, F4
and P4) were collected by the textile cap. The reference and
ground electrodes were placed on the ears using ear-clips. The
signals were recorded with a Cyton board and shown on the
OpenBCI GUI in real-time. For comparison, each subject was
asked to complete the experiment with both the gold cup wet
electrodes (using Ten20 conductive paste), the OpenBCI
Ultracortex

Fig 3.

Mark  headset, and the soft EEG textile cap in the same
manner. The three EEG devices were set up in random. The
medium Mark IV frame was 3D printed and self-assembled
following the instructions mentioned on the OpenBCI website.
The set-up time for each device was then recorded. At 30
minutes and more, the wet electrodes set-up was the most
time-consuming. The set-up of the textile cap and Mark IV,
which was recorded at approximately 12 min and 15min
respectively, took the least amount of time. From the
experiment, it was clear that the wearable devices equipped
with dry electrodes were more efficient and convenient.
At the end of the experiment, each subject was asked to
scale the two wearable devices (Ultracortex Mark IV and
textile EEG cap), using a semantic differential (SD) evaluation
survey. Each subject was given an explanation of the question
in advance and allowed to physically touch and observe the
two devices. Semantic differential (SD) is a type of rating
scale designed by Osgood et al. [17], to measure the attitude
towards the given object, event or concept. In this study for
wearable devices, user-friendly characteristics such as simple
operation, no mechanical stress during longer-term use, and
daily appearance were taken into account. In the experiment,
seven contrasting adjectives were used based on these matters,
and a 7-point rating scale from -3 to +3 to derive the attitudes
of the participants towards the two wearable devices. The
seven bipolar adjectives were: 1.tight/loose, 2.strong/weak,
3.heavy/light,
4.rigid/soft,
5.bad-looking/good-looking,
6.uncomfortable/comfortable, 7.dislike/like. For each antonym
adjective pair, there was an explanatory question (see
Appendix).
The total experiment process for each subject was
explained in Fig. 4, taking 2 hours. Trial 1, trial 2 and trial 3
was conducted randomly, with a 3min break after each trial.

The Design and Structure of Textile EEG Cap with Dry Electrodes held by Ultra-Soft Gel Holders.

60 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020

Fig 4.

The Total Process of the Experiment.

B. Experiment II - Emotion Detection for Elderly People
To further test the application performance of the textile
EEG cap, caps in two sizes were made: S size for head
circumference ranging from (55~57) ± 0.5 cm, L size for head
circumference ranging from (57~60) ± 0.5 cm. An emotion
monitoring experiment was conducted on 5 healthy elderly
subjects (2 females and 3 males, aged over 65 years old). A
detailed file containing general information and instructions
on the experiment was sent to them in advance. In this file,
they were required to wear loose clothes and women were
asked to wear their hair naturally to help facilitate the setup of
the devices. All the subjects signed a consent form stating that
their physical information could be used for this research and
not for other use. A Japanese student was available for any
questions from Japanese elderly participants.
In this experiment, videos were chosen to elicit positive
and negative emotions. Six 1-3 min film-clips [18] were
selected based on previous studies. Of these, 3 videos elicited
positive emotion and 3 videos for negative emotion. Japanese
professors and teachers confirmed the final video selection, as
elderly people may be vulnerable to mental and physical stress
or affected in daily life by the videos.
The experiment process was first explained to the elderly
subjects clearly in Japanese in advance. Then the head size of
each subject was measured to set with the correct size of cap.
Next, the textile EEG cap was equipped to the subjects with
four channels (F3, F4, P3 and P4) and two ground channels
clipped to their ears. At the same time, the self-assessment
form was explained in Japanese so that the subject got
familiarized with the content. Before the formal experiment,
the subjects were asked to sit comfortably with minimal
movement during the experiment, and the signal stability was
checked. After that, the subjects performed a practice trial to
familiarize themselves with the system. Next, the formal
experiment started with 1 min of baseline recording while the
subjects were asked to close their eyes. The six videos were
presented semi-randomly in six trials, taking about 10 min in
total. Each trial consisted of the following steps: (1) 10s to

relax and display the current number of the displayed videos;
(2) Display of videos; (3) 20s of self-assessment.
EEG signals were collected on an equipped recording PC
(Dell Inspiron 7370), sampling at 250Hz. Stimulating videos
were performed on a PC (Dell Alienware M15). Fig. 5 shows
the scene of one subject during the experiment. At the end of
the experiment, the subjects were asked to evaluate the
wearing experience of the textile EEG cap.

Fig 5.

A Subject during the Emotional Detection Experiment.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. The Performance of Textile EEG Cap on Signal Capture
The measured data of 2 subjects was incomplete as the wet
electrodes lost contact with the scalp. There was some obvious
noise present in the data from another 2 subjects due to
movement and the heaviness of hair. Therefore, the signal data
of 16 participants were used for data analysis. The raw data
was filtered with a bandpass (0.5~40Hz) to remove the main
noise and artifacts in order to get clean data. Fig. 6 showed the
filtered signal waveform of the P3 channel collected from the
textile EEG cap.
During the frequency analysis, the power spectral density
(PSD) was obtained using a multi-taper spectral estimation
method [19], which is more robust than the classical and
Welch's periodograms. At last, the ratio of each band power
(delta: 0.5~4Hz, theta: 4~8Hz, alpha: 8~12Hz, beta: 12~40Hz)
in 10s was computed through integration.

61 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020

types of systems. The results in Table II showed that all the
correlation values are over 0.820, with an average of about
0.857 for closed eyes and opened eyes. Hence, the measured
signals from the textile cap and the wet electrodes were highly
correlated to each other.

Fig 6.

The above results show that the designed textile EEG cap
monitored EEG signals from all channels and reflected brain
activity to the same level of accuracy as the wet electrodes.
This was due to the reliable contact between the new dry
electrodes and the scalp which was supported by the ultra-soft
gel holder. As shown in Fig. 7, when the eyes were opened
some noises, such as eye blinking, were easily picked up in
the low-frequency band. This highlighted the need to improve
the noise-immunity of the dry electrodes and the structure of
the device. On the other hand, it also revealed that a strong
denoising algorithm can be achieved.

The Filtered Waveform of P3 Measured from Textile EEG Cap.

Table I lists the average ratios of the band power of the
EEG signal of each channel collected from the textile cap for
the 16 subjects, with both eyes closed and eyes opened. It was
found that the alpha band power was higher in each channel
with eyes closed. The alpha wave was more apparent in the
parietal lobe (P3 and P4) than the frontal lobe (F3 and F4). In
general, the delta wave tends to be seen commonly in adults in
slow-wave sleep state, while theta wave may be seen in a
drowsy or meditative state. The alpha wave emerges with the
closing of the eyes or when in a state of relaxation and
decreases with the opening of the eye or mental exertion. Beta
wave is closely linked to active thinking and attention. It was
deduced that the textile EEG cap could detect EEG signals
from all the channels correctly and stably reflect the brain
activities.

Close eyes

(a)

For comparison of the signal quality, the EEG signals
collected from the textile cap were compared with the signals
collected with wet electrodes. As the signals were not
monitored simultaneously, the PSD of the signals from each
channel between the textile cap and wet electrodes was
compared. The correlation coefficient (CC) was widely used
to measure the degree of linear correlation between two sets of
data. Fig. 7 shows a comparison of one sample of PSD of the
signals collected using the textile EEG cap system with the
wet electrodes system with (a) eyes closed and (b) eyes
opened respectively. Table II presents the average correlation
results of the PSD of signals from all channels from these two
TABLE I.

Open eyes

(b)
Fig 7. The Comparison of PSD of EEG Signal recorded by Textile EEG
Cap and Wet Electrodes System respectively (a) When Close Eyes, (b) When
Open Eyes.

THE AVERAGE RATIOS OF BAND POWER OF EEG SIGNALS FROM EACH CHANNEL COLLECTED FROM THE TEXTILE EEG CAP WHEN CLOSE EYES AND
OPEN EYES

Close eyes
Band

Open eyes

Delta

Theta

Alpha

Beta

Delta

Theta

Alpha

Beta

F3

0.555

0.123

0.264

0.058

0.726

0.143

0.083

0.050

P3

0.379

0.102

0.426

0.093

0.668

0.141

0.096

0.094

F4

0.527

0.133

0.280

0.061

0.718

0.145

0.090

0.047

P4

0.329

0.140

0.436

0.098

0.718

0.107

0.106

0.068

Channel

62 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020
TABLE II.
THE AVERAGE CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS OF THE PSD OF
EEG SIGNAL OF EACH CHANNEL WITH EYES CLOSED AND EYES OPENED,
BETWEEN THE TEXTILE EEG CAP AND WET ELECTRODES SYSTEM
State

Close eyes

Open eyes

Channel
F3

0.829

0.835

P3

0.823

0.896

F4

0.896

0.900

P4

0.849

0.832

B. Factor Analysis of Wearable Devices
Fig. 8 visualizes the image scale of the semantic
differential (SD) evaluation average score of the 20 subjects
for the two wearable devices: the textile EEG cap and the
Ultracortex Mark IV. The soft textile EEG cap attracted more
positive feedback than Ultracortex Mark IV. The textile cap
was also reported to exert less pressure and skin irritation than
the Mark IV. Moreover, the majority of the subjects expressed
that they felt the textile cap was very light-weight, soft, more
natural in appearance, and able to be worn as an accessory in
daily life. Most people also exhibited a preference for the
textile cap for long-term use due to the added comfort and
natural appearance.

users reported enjoying the good fit and freedom it provided.
The Ultracortex Mark IV design utilizes a large rigid plastic
frame for mounting the electrodes, which are fixed using extra
plastic inserts. Despite the adjustable 3D-printable EEG
headset that receives signals while reducing noise, its added
weight, rigidness, and appearance limited its application for
extended use in daily life.
A factor analysis of SD scores of the two wearable devices
(the textile EEG cap and the Ultracortex Mark IV) taken from
the 20 subjects was conducted. The purpose was to gain
insight into the underlying factors which influence the
usability of wearable EEG devices. Factor analysis [20] is a
statistical technique that extracts fewer common unobserved
factors from observed and correlated variables.
Python was used to perform the factor analysis. Firstly, the
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) and the Bartlett test was
conducted to check the suitability of data for factor analysis.
In general, the value of KMO is less than 0.6 and is considered
inadequate [20]. Table III presents the results from the KMO
and the Bartlett test. It shows that the overall KMO value for
the data is 0.83 (>0.6), which indicates that it could achieve a
sound analysis effect. The p-value in the Bartlett test is 0.00;
indicating that the correlation matrix is not an identity matrix.
Therefore, the factor analysis was proceeded.
TABLE III.

THE KMO AND BARLETT’S TEST OF THE FACTOR ANALYSIS OF
THE WEARABLE DEVICES

Fig 8.

Image Scale of SD Evaluation Score (Average Value) of the Two
Wearable Devices.

The positive feedback from subjects for the EEG textile
cap may be attributed to the following factors. Firstly, the
frame of the cap was sewn with elastic textile fabric made of
43% rayon, 51% polyester, 6% polyurethane. The
combination of rayon (R) for comfort, polyester (P) for
strength and polyurethane (PU) for flexibility optimized the
user experience. Secondly, the ultra-softness and sound
elasticity of ultra-soft gel exerted a certain buffering effect on
the scalp to relieve the pressure around the head. The gel acted
like human skin. Thirdly, the use of the gel allowed for a
greater focus on the visual and ergonomic components of a
fitted cap without tightly surrounding the chin or ears. The

Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy.

0.830

Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity

Approx. Chi-Square

222.205

Sig.

0.000

Secondly, after selecting the number of factors, a scree
plot was used to draw a straight line for each factor and its
eigenvalues. The position where the number of eigenvalues is
greater than 1.0 is used to help determine the appropriate
number of factors. Fig. 9 shows the scree plot of the factor
analysis for the two wearable devices. It can be seen that only
1 factor has an eigenvalue greater than 1.0. However, as the
second-factor eigenvalue is very close to 1.0, it was difficult to
select the number of factors. As a result, combing
interpretation of variation ratio of principle component
analysis was adopted.

Fig 9.

The Screen Plot of Factor Analysis of the Wearable Devices.

63 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020
TABLE IV.

TOTAL VARIANCE EXPLAINED OF EACH COMPONENT OF THE FACTOR ANALYSIS OF THE WEARABLE DEVICES

Initial Eigenvalues

Rotation Sums of Square Loadings

Component

Total

of Variance %

Cumulative %

Total

of Variance %

Cumulative %

1

4.780

68.279

68.279

3.337

47.675

47.675

2

0.926

13.233

81.513

1.717

24.524

72.199

3

0.497

7.096

88.609

4

0.298

4.256

92.865

5

0.258

3.684

96.549

6

0.137

1.957

98.507

7

0.105

1.493

100.000

It has been suggested that the extracted principal
component should explain at least 5-10% [20] of the data
variation. It was also believed that the extracted principal
components should accumulate 60-70% of the data variation
cumulatively. The principal factor method with varimax
(orthogonal rotation) was used to get the total variance
explained. Table IV describes the result of the total variance
explained in each component. These results showed that the
second component explained 13.23% of the data variation and
the first two components cumulatively explained 72.199% of
the data variation. Therefore, the number of factors were fixed
at two to perform the required extraction of factors. The
rotated component matrix, showing the variance explained by
the observed variables, was calculated using the principal
factor method with varimax rotation.
Table V shows the rotated component matrix. It shows that
the seven variables could be reduced into two factors. Factor
1; the material properties factor, includes 4 variables: 1. light
pressure, 2. weak skin irritation, 3. light-weight, and 4. soft.
Factor 2; the design pattern factor, contains 3 variables: 5.
good-looking, 6. comfortable, and 7. like. It was shown that
the extraction of two factors has a good ability to interpret the
results; it is consistent with the SD scale results; and that the
textile cap received more positive feedback than the plastic
cap. In addition, the variable 6 (comfortable) and variable 7
(like) load in factor 1 was more than 0.5. This shows that
factor 1 (materials properties) also impacts them. This factor
was expected to play an important role in developing wearable
EEG devices in the future.
C. Emotion Detection Result
As explained in the section IV, sub-section A, the
collected data was filtered to first get clean data first and then
extract features. To enable emotion classification, the last 30
seconds of the six videos were used according to the
assessment of the subjects. In referring to the algorithm [6],
the spectrograms of EEG data were obtained using the Shorttime Fourier transform (STFT), then emotion classification on
valence level (positive and negative) using the convolutional
neural network (CNN) was conducted.

TABLE V.

THE ROTATED COMPONENT MATRIX OF THE FACTOR ANALYSIS
OF THE WEARABLE DEVICES

Factor1

Factor2

1

0.796

0.339

2

0.779

0.376

3

0.892

0.143

4

0.768

0.361

5

0.127

0.680

6

0.603

0.696

7

0.589

0.591

As emotion responses last for just a few milliseconds [21],
one spectrogram represents a signal of one-second. In [22], the
relationship and differences between the left and right
hemispheres are closely related to positive and negative
emotions. Each person watching 6 videos, totaling 180s,
meant that 720 spectrograms from four channels (F3, F4, P3
and P4) were considered as input. The CNN model had three
convolutional layers and three max-pooling layers. The size of
all the filters in convolutional layers was 3×3. A dropout of
0.3 was used after the fully connected layer with 256 hidden
layers. The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activating function
was used and the applied optimizer was stochastic gradient
descent (SGD), with a learning rate of 0.0001. For each
subject, classification was performed for the signals from four
channels and a 5-fold cross-validation was used to determine
the accuracy. Some subjects had a poor accuracy rating of
under 70%. According to the videos which were recorded of
the experimental scenes, the elderly subjects tend to take naps
while watching the stimuli. Also, they had misclassifications
during assessment, rating a negative video as positive. The
misclassified data was changed to match the correct videos
before classifying the emotion. In this way, the results, as
shown in Fig. 10 rose to an average accuracy of 81.32%.

64 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020

the materials properties factor and the design pattern factor
cumulatively explained 72.199% of the data variation. This
highlights the need to focus on the two factors when designing
new wearable headsets in the future. Finally, an emotion
detection experiment was performed on five healthy elderly
participants to evaluate the application performance of the
textile cap, which got an average classification accuracy of
81.32%. The pilot study confirmed the feasibility and prospect
of the wearable textile cap in real-time emotion classification
for elderly people comfortably.
VI. FUTURE WORK

Fig 10. Emotion Classification Accuracy of Elderly People using the Textile
EEG Cap.

This result drew out the following points. Firstly, although
the classification result on the valence level is worse than the
arousal level using the same algorithm, the textile EEG cap
was useful in detecting emotions by monitoring EEG data. It’s
easy to detect whether the emotion was activated or not,
however it’s hard to distinguish the different emotions.
Secondly, to do the experiment with elderly people, more
attention should be paid to their physical condition and
psychological stress. Thirdly, EEG metrics, such as alpha,
correlated with ages, differing between young people and
elderly people [23]. The classification algorithm for elderly
people needs to be improved. On the other hand, all the
subjects considered that the textile cap was comfortable during
monitoring, was visually appealing, and could be used in daily
life.
Referring to [24], a wearable EEG headband using printed
electrodes was developed aiming at supporting elderly people.
In consistent with this research, emotion detection using
wearable smart devices shows great value to evaluating the
quality of life of people. Unlike designing headband tested on
young participants, a textile cap was developed with aesthetics
and comfort in this research, also measured on elderly people.
On the other hand, they designed the energy harvester taking
the place of battery, which is the issue to be considered.

This research provides an innovative approach to the
development of a comfortable wearable EEG devices.
However, there also remains several limitations. Firstly, the
cap only has four channels, which needs to include more
channels for more EEG information; Secondly, the dry
electrodes are commercially available, and would be
developed using smart textiles in future work. Thirdly, the
power supply comes from the heavy battery, limiting the
mobility. Besides, with further research, this would also meet
demands to optimize the appearance design, and combine
function, ergonomics, and security issues to eliminate
reluctances to use the devices from the users, especially
elderly people. In the future, it’s necessary to contribute to
improving the classification algorithm for emotion detection
of elderly people. It’s promising to realize real-time emotion
monitoring system from EEG signal using wearable device
during long-term period comfortably and conveniently.
Besides EEG cap, wearable devices would be designed to
monitor other physical signals, like electrocardiogram (ECG),
combined with EEG to detect emotion for elderly people more
accurately in daily life.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by the JSPS
KAKENHI Grant Number 19H01138 and 19H04154. We
would also like to extend our gratitude and acknowledgment
to the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for supporting the
Ph.D. research of F.M.Z., and to all the young and the elderly
subjects from Kyoto who cooperated to aid in completing the
experiment.

V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper has presented the development of a comfortable
and user-friendly 4-channel EEG cap integrated with textiles
which can be used for emotion detection for elderly people.
First, the dry comb electrodes were used and secured in place
using an ultra-soft urethane gel holder. Next, an ergonomically
designed fitted cap was fabricated with a focus on aesthetics
and comfort. The wearable device demonstrated high-level
performance, reflecting brain activity from all channels. The
signals from the cap were strongly paralleled with the
commercial wet electrodes, giving an average correlation
results of the PSD of EEG signal from all channels about
0.857. The flexible design improved the usability of the
device, enhanced operational conveniences, reduced pressure,
and made the device lighter, softer, more comfortable, and
more natural in appearance. According to the factor analysis
on the SD scale results of the two wearable devices: Textile
EEG Cap and Ultracortex Mark IV, the two extracted factors;

[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

REFERENCES
N. Muramatsu, and H. Akiyama, "Japan: super-aging society preparing
for the future," The Gerontologist, vol. 51, pp. 425-432, 2011.
H. Chao, L. Dong, Y. Liu, and B. Lu, “Emotion Recognition from
Multiband EEG Signals Using CapsNet,” Sensors, vol. 19, pp. 2212,
May 2019.
J. Zhang, M. Chen, S. Zhao, S. Hu, Z. Shi, and Y. Cao, “ReliefF-based
EEG sensor selection methods for emotion recognition,” vol. 16, pp.
1558, 2016.
J. Kissler, C. Herbert, I. Winkler, and M. Junghofer, “Emotion and
attention in visual word processing—An ERP study,” Biological
Psychology, vol. 80, pp. 75-83, 2009.
D. W. Chen, R. Miao, W. Q. Yang, Y. Liang, H. H. Chen, L. Huang, et
al, “A Feature Extraction Method Based on Differential Entropy and
Linear Discriminant Analysis for Emotion Recognition,” Sensors, vol.
19, pp. 1631, 2019.
F. M. ZENG, P. J. LIAO, M. Iwamoto, and N. Kuwahara, “Emotional
Changes Detection for Dementia People with Spectrograms from
Physiological Signals,” IJACSA, vol. 9, 2018.

65 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

(IJACSA) International Journal of Advanced Computer Science and Applications
Vol. 11, No. 4, 2020
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]

[15]
[16]

[17]
[18]

J. W. Kam, S. Griffin, A. Shen, S. Patel, H. Hinrichs, H. Heinze, et al,
“Systematic comparison between a wireless EEG system with dry
electrodes and a wired EEG system with wet electrodes,” NeuroImage,
vol. 184, pp. 119-129, 2019.
P. Fiedler, P. Pedrosa, S. Griebel, C. Fonseca, F. Vaz, E. Supriyanto, et
al,
“Novel
multipin
electrode
cap
system
for
dry
electroencephalography,” Brain Topography, vol. 28, pp. 647-656, 2015.
G. D. Flumeri, P. Arico, G. Borghini, N. Sciaraffa, A. D. Florio, and F.
Babiloni, “The dry revolution: Evaluation of three different EEG dry
electrode types in terms of signal spectral features, mental states
classification and usability,” Sensors, vol. 19, pp. 1365, 2019.
X. Xing, Y. Wang, W. Pei, X. Guo, Z. Liu, F. Wang, et al, “A highspeed SSVEP-based BCI using dry EEG electrodes,” Scientific Reports,
vol. 8, 2018.
W. D. Hairston, K. W. Whitaker, A. J. Ries, J. M. Vettel, J. C. Bradford,
S. E. Kerick, et al, “Usability of four commercially-oriented EEG
systems,” Journal of Neural Engineering, vol. 11, 2014.
S. Debener, R. Emkes, M. De Vos, and M. G. Bleichner, “Unobtrusive
ambulatory EEG using a smartphone and flexible printed electrodes
around the ear,” Scientific Reports, vol. 5, 2015.
D. L. Lacko, J. Vleugels, E. Fransen, T. Huysmans, G. De Bruyne, M.
M. Van Hulle, et al, “Ergonomic design of an EEG headset using 3D
anthropometry,” Applied Ergonomics, vol. 58, pp. 128-136, 2017.
X. Yu, and W. Qi, “A User Study of Wearable EEG Headset Products
for Emotion Analysis,” Proceedings of the 2018 International
Conference on Algorithms, Computing and Artificial Intelligence.
ACM, 2018.
R. P. Ching, “Relationship between head mass and circumference in
human adults University of Washington,” Technical Brief, 2007.
V. Jurcak, D. Tsuzuki, and I. Dan, “10/20, 10/10, and 10/5 systems
revisited: their validity as relative head-surface-based positioning
systems,” Neuroimage, vol. 34, pp. 1600-1611, 2007.
C. E. Osgood, J. S. George, H. T. Percy, “The measurement of
meaning,” University of Illinois Press, 1957.
T. L. Gilman, R. Shaheen, K. M. Nylocks, D. Halachoff, J. Chapman, J.
J. Flynn, et al, "A film set for the elicitation of emotion in research: A

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

comprehensive catalog derived from four decades of investigation,"
Behavior research methods, vol. 49, pp. 2061-2082, 2017.
M. J. Prerau, R. E. Brown, M. T. Bianchi, J. M. Ellenbogen, and P. L.
Purdon, “Sleep neurophysiological dynamics through the lens of
multitaper spectral analysis,” Physiology, vol. 32, pp. 60-92, 2016.
A. G. Yong, and P. Sean, “A beginner’s guide to factor analysis:
Focusing on exploratory factor analysis,” Tutorials in Quantitative
Methods for Psychology, vol. 9, pp. 79-94, 2013.
M. Codispoti, M. Mazzetti, and M. M. Bradley, "Unmasking emotion:
Exposure duration and emotional engagement," Psychophysiology, vol.
46, pp. 731-738, 2009.
J. W. Matiko, S. P. Beeby, and J. Tudor, "Fuzzy logic based emotion
classification," 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) IEEE, 2014.
J. P. Trammell, P. G. MacRae, G. Davis, D. Bergstedt, A. E. Anderson,
“The Relationship of Cognitive Performance and the Theta-Alpha Power
Ratio Is Age-Dependent: An EEG Study of Short Term Memory and
Reasoning during Task and Resting-State in Healthy Young and Old
Adults,” Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, vol. 9, pp. 364, 2017.
J. W. Matiko, Y. Wei, R. Torah, N. J. Grabham, G. Paul, S. P. Beeby, et
al, “Wearable EEG headband using printed electrodes and powered by
energy harvesting for emotion monitoring in ambient assisted living,”
Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 24, 2015.
APPENDIX
The explanatory questions for the contrasting adjectives.
1) What are your thoughts on the pressure caused by the device?
2) What do you think about the skin irritation caused by the device?
3) Do you think it’s heavy?
4) How does it feel to touch?
5) What do you think about its appearance design?
6) How about your feelings on the cap overall?
7) Do

you

prefer

this

device

for

long-term

use?

66 | P a g e
www.ijacsa.thesai.org

