15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)

Electroencephalographic Activities as Biomarker in
the Accumulative Dose of Alcoholic Drinker:
A Preliminary Study
Phakkharawat Sittiprapaporn
Brain Science and Engineering Innovation Research Unit
School of Anti-Aging and Regenerative Medicine
Mae Fah Luang University, Bangkok, Thailand
Email: wichian.sit@mfu.ac.th

Djohan

Roungsan Chaisricharoen

Graduate School of Indonesia Institute of the Arts
Indonesia Institute of the Arts
Yogyakarta, Indonesia
Email: djohan.djohan@yahoo.com

Brain Science and Engineering Innovation Research Unit
School of Information Technology
Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai, Thailand
Email: roungsan.cha@mfu.ac.th
hours rather than drinking a single dose of alcohol in a period
of 10-20 min [1]. These drinking behaviors have been reported
in previous studies. These previous studies investigated the
effects of alcohol on speech perception under realistic social
drinking situation [1-2].

Abstract—The attentional processing of the human brain
during the discrimination of supra-segmental features of Thai
phonemes related to working memory was investigated. The
electroencephalographic activities of accumulative dose of alcohol
were investigated while the measurement of brain function of the
cognitive task of discrimination of supra-segmental features of
Thai phonemes. The cognitive effort caused changes by the
difficulty in discriminating supra-segmental features of Thai
phonemes were reflected in specific electroencephalographic
signals. A 14-channels electroencephalogram (EMOTIV Inc.,
USA) was used to record the electrical activities. The electrode
array was placed according to the international 10-20 system.
Both earlobes were used as references. Electroencephalographic
activities were recorded in two different periods; resting period
and cognitive task. In the cognitive task, the participants were
asked to perform the cognitive task in order to measure their
brain function of discrimination of supra-segmental features of
Thai phonemes. The SuperLab program were used to deliver all
stimuli to the participants. The result showed that there was a
neuronal population related to the working memory activating
strongly at the right medial temporal gyrus.
Keywords—Acohol; Brain; Electroencephalogrm
Standardized Electromagnetic Tomography (sLORETA)

Theoretically, Event-related Potentials (ERPs) components
are known to monitor the detection of consciousness with
several features of sounds. These features include the physical
feature, the semantic feature, and the syntactic deviation,
respectively. The ERP recordings have been used in
investigating the insight of the neuronal events especially in
relation to the auditory change detection of the human brain
function. The probing the neural processes preceding the
involvement of the attentional mechanisms were done by the
ERP recording [3]. The present study investigated the attention
and memory process in the human brain while discriminating
the cognitive tasks composing of the supra-segmental features
of monosyllabic Thai words. In order to locate the multiple
non-dipolar sources, the standardized low-resolution
electromagnetic tomography (sLORETA) calculation were also
applied.

(EEG);

II.
I.

INTRODUCTION

A. Participants:
The experiment was done with five participants, aged
between 32-47 years old. All participants were in good health.
No congenital illness, no record of brain surgery, not taking
medicines or drugs that affect to nervous system were
personally reported. All participants were reported that they
regularly alcoholic drinker. The left handedness was set as the
exclusion criteria. Moreover, other criteria include history of
medical and neurologic diseases, psychiatric disorders, head
trauma or assumption of central nervous system active drugs
in the two weeks prior to study entry were strictly controlled.
However, if we found the presence of EEG abnormalities at

The consumption of alcohol is generally known to effect on
human brain function, cognition, and performance. It has been
focused on the research attention and memory. Alcoholics have
also reduced cortical grey and white matter volumes when
compared to light drinkers. It is generally accepted that both
white and grey matter damages in relation to functional
connectivity between distinct brain regions may be disturbed in
alcoholics. Generally, in the social situations, alcohol is usually
consumed in the cumulative fashion. That means most of
people consume a number of less potent drinks over of several
Corresponding author: Assist. Prof. Phakkharawat Sittiprapaporn, Ph.D.,
Brain Science and Engineering Innovation Research Unit (BSEI), School of
Anti-Aging and Regenerative Medicine (AARM), Mae Fah Luang University,
Bangkok, Thailand; Email: wichian.sit@mfu.ac.th
*

978-1-5386-3552-0/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

MATERIALS AND METHODS

185

15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)

the baseline recording occurring during the measurement, the
participants were excluded. Finally, the experimenter
explained the purposes of the present study as well as other
details before providing the informed consent to participants
to sign in. The written consents were collected from all
participants before participating in the study. The informed
consents were managed regarding the regulation of Helsinki
declaration.

field of all participants. These contributions were defined by
the regions of interest (ROI) on the basis of local maxima of
the sLORETA distribution [11-12]. It is based on the linear
weighted sum of the scalp electric potentials [11].
Additionally, the applied version of sLORETA used a threeshell spherical head model aligned to the Talairach space.
Based on sLORETA software, the sLORETA will choose the
smoothest of all possible current density configurations
throughout the human brain volume. The sLORETA will then
maximize the total squared Laplacian of source strengths.
However, the implication of the sLORETA method is only
shown that all neighboring voxels have a maximally similar
electrical activity [11-12].

B. Procedures:
Electroencephalographic activities effected by the
accumulative does of alcohol was investigated with
participants who personally reported as accumulative
alcoholic drinkers. Four pairs of physically different suprasegmental features of monosyllabic Thai words were included
in the cognitive task in which all participants kept doing. The
cognitive task of two blocks, 50 trails per block, were
randomly order to the participants to complete.

E. Statistical analysis:
After logarithmic transformation, paired t-test statistics was
used to compared between sLORETA images showing
information of the cortical sources. Statistical tests at p ≤ 0.05
(two-tailed) were set as significance level.

C. Electroencephalographic recording:
The 14 channels EEG using EMOTIV system (EMOTIV,
Inc., USA) was used to record the electrical activities in the
human brain. Regarding to the international 10-20 system of
electrode placement, the electrode array was placed on the
participants’ heads. Both earlobes were used as the references.
The bandpass filtered was set at 0.05-100Hz. They were also
digitized at the 1,000 Hz in order to process the EEG signals.
The average frequency domains were obtained from those
presented stimuli. EEG activity was recorded during the
measurement of accumulative alcohol drinkers’ brain function
in the different supra-segmental features of monosyllabic Thai
words
discrimination.
SuperLab
software
(Cedrus
Corporation, San Pedro, USA) was used to deliver all stimuli
to the participants during the experiment (see Table 1.)

III.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSOIN

EEG signals reflected by the discrimination of all stimuli
revealed changes in the cognitive effort using the suprasegmental features of monosyllabic Thai words. The threedimensional distribution was calculated by sLORETA. The
representation of the cortical generators was also analyzed. It
revealed the changes of difficulty in discriminating suprasegmental features of monosyllabic Thai words. These changes
showed strongly activated in the right medial temporal gyrus
(70, -20, -10; BA21) (see fig. 1-4).

Table I. The discrimination of stimuli presented by the stimulus presentation
Stimuli
□H
□□L

□L
□□R

Supra-Segmental Features of Monosyllabic Thai Words
same short vowel, different pitch
same long vowel, different pitch

Remak : □ represents short vowel; □□ represents long vowel; □H represents
short vowel with high pitch; □L represents short vowel with low pitch; □□L
represents long vowel with low pitch; □□R represents long vowel with rising
pitch.

D. Computation of power spectra:
sLORETA imaging program [11] was used to analyze and
display the three-dimensional distribution of the cortical
generators of all participants’ brain. According to PascualMarqui et al. [11], sLORETA calculates the current source
density distribution in the human brain. These current source
density distributions contribute to the electrical scalp field at
each of 2395 voxels in the gray matter and the hippocampus.
These references brains are adopted from the MNI 305, Brain
Imaging Centre, Montreal Neurological Institute. Importantly,
the sLORETA calculated the three-dimensional source
generator of the electrical activities. These sources of
electrical activities were contributed to the electrical scalp

Fig.1 sLORETA was used to calculate the xyz-values in Talairach space of
the frequency domain window. The discrimination of stimuli showed strongly
activated in the right medial temporal gyrus (MTG) (70, -20, -10; BA21) for
/□H/ (Top; 5.16μV) and /□L/ (Bottom; 4.83μV), respectively.

186

15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)

Fig. 2 sLORETA was used to calculate the source generator of the frequency
domain window. The source generator of changes for /□H/ (Left) and /□L/
(Right) activated more strongly the right hemisphere (RH) (see description in
Fig. 1).

Fig. 4 sLORETA was used to calculate the source generator of the frequency
domain window. The source generator of changes for /□□L/ (Left) to /□□R/
(Right) activated more strongly the right hemisphere (RH) (see more
description in Fig. 3).

The attention and memory processes in the human brain
were previously reported that they were related to changes of
neural representation in the human brain. These changes of
neuronal representation were induced by new sensory inputs
[12-17]. In the present study, the discrimination ability
reflected by the cognitive task composing of the suprasegmental features of monosyllabic Thai words was also
reflected in the attention and memory processes. These
processes were revealed by the power spectra of EEG
activities. The electrophysiological activities in temporal areas
in this study are stayed in the line with other previous studies
[18-19]. Several previous studies have been characterized the
human brain responses to different sets of novel stimuli
including the identifiable and non-identifiable sounds. In
addition, these previous studies also demonstrated the
activation of fronto-parietal areas and temporal network of the
human brain responses [18-19].

According to the sLORETA methodology, the sLORETA
source imaging restricts the localization of electrical
generators to cortical gray matter and hippocampus naming
the technically “blurred” spatial resolution [11-12]. Although
the exclusion of the involvement of subcortical structures in
the sLORETA solution space, the possible involvement of
subcortical structures from the sLORETA solution space were
also investigated with the power spectra [19].
IV.

CONCLUSION

The present study measured the electroencephalographic
activities in the accumulative alcoholic drinkers’ brain while
processing the cognitive tasks. The present study used the
supra-segmental features of monosyllabic Thai words
discrimination as the cognitive tasks. The result showed that it
reflected in specific electroencephalographic signals in the
accumulative alcoholic drinkers’ brain. The neuronal
populations might need for accumulative alcoholic drinkers’
working memory processing in the brain. Additionally, the
processing was taken place in the right medial temporal gyrus
accessed by the sLORETA.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was fully supported by grant no.
61210320031 (31/2018) under the “Electroencephalographic
Studies of Biomarker in the Human Brain of Alcohol
Dependence Syndrome during the Processing of Informative
Perception Project” funding by Mae Fah Luang University,
Thailand. We thank all of the participants involved in this
preliminary study as main data provider of this study.

REFERENCES
Fig. 3 sLORETA was used to calculate the xyz-values in Talairach space of
the frequency domain window. The discrimination of stimuli showed strongly
activated in the right medial temporal gyrus (MTG) (70, -20, -10; BA21) for
/□□L/ (Top; 1.76μV) and /□□R/ (Bottom; 2.18μV), respectively.

[1]

187

B.D. Bartholow, M. Pearson, K.J. Sher, L.C. Wieman, M. Fabiani and
G. Gratton, “Effects of Alcohol Consumption and Alcohol Susceptibility
on Cognition: A Psychophysiological Examination.” Biological
Psychology, vol. 64, pp. 167-190, 2003.

15th International Conference on Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and Information Technology (ECTI-NCON2018)
[11] R.D. Pascual-Marqui, C.M. Michel and D. Lehmann, “Low resolution
electromagnetic tomography: a new method for localizing electrical
activity in the brain,” Int. J. Psychophysiol. vol. 18, pp. 49-65, 1994.
[12] E. Donchin and M.G.H. Coles, “Is the P300 component a manifestation
of context updating?,” Braib Behav. Sci., vol. 11, pp. 357-374, 1988.
[13] E. Halgren, P. Baudena, J.M. Clarke, G. Heit, C. Liègeois, P. Chauvel
and A. Musolino, “Intracerebral potentials to rare target and distractor
auditory and visual stimuli. I. Superior temporal plane and parietal
lobe,” Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 95, pp. 191-220,
1995.
[14] R. Johnson, “The amplitude of the P300 component of the event related
potentials: review and synthesis,” In: P.K. Ackles, J.R. Jennings, M.G.H.
Coles (Eds.), Advances in Psychophysiology, vol. 2, JAI Press,
Greenwich, CT, pp.69-137, 1988.
[15] J. Katayama and J. Polich, “Stimulus context determines P3a and P3b,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 35, pp. 22-23, 1998.
[16] M. Molnár, “On the origin of the P300 component of the event-related
potential component: review and synthesis,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol.
17, pp. 129-144, 1994.
[17] T.W. Picton, “The P300 wave of the human event-related potential,” J.
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 59, pp. 456-479, 1992.
[18] B. Opitz, A. Mecklinger, A.D. Frederici and D.Y. von Cramon, “The
functional neuroanatomy of novelty processing: integrating ERP and
fMRI results,” Cereb. Cortex, vol. 9, pp. 279-391, 1999.
[19] U. Volpe, A. Mucci, P. Bucci, E. Merlotti, S. Galderisi and M. Maj,
“The cortical geneators of P3a and P3b: A LORETA study,” Brain Res.
Bull., vol. 73, pp. 220-230, 2007.

[2]

P. Pearson, L.A. Dawe, B. Timney, “Frequency Selective Effects of
Alcohol on Auditory Detection and Frequency Discrimination
Thresholds.” Alcohol and Alcoholism, vol. 34, issue 5, pp. 741-749,
1999.
[3] R. Näätänen, A.W. Gaillard, and S Mäntysalo, “Early selective-attention
effect on evoked potential reinterpreted.,” Acta Psychol., vol. 42, pp.
313-329, 1978.
[4] T. Koenig and D. Lehmann, “Microstate in language-related brain
potential maps show noun-verb differences,” Brain Lang, vol. 53, pp.
169-182, 1996.
[5] D. Lehmann and W. Skrandies, “Reference-free identification of
components of checkerboard-evoked multichannel potential fields,”
Electroencephalogr. Cli. Neurophysiol., vol. 48, pp. 609-621, 1980.
[6] D. Lehmann and W. Skrandies, “Spatial analysis of evoked potentials in
man: A review,” Prog. Neurobiol., vol. 23, pp. 227-250, 1984.
[7] C.M. Michel, M.M. Murray, G. Lantz, S. Gonzalez, L. Spinelli and R.
Grave de Peralte, “EEG source imaging,” Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 115,
pp. 2195-2222, 2004.
[8] W.K. Strik, T. Dierks, E. Franzek, G. Stöber and K. Maurer, “P300
asymmetries in schizophrenia revisited with reference-independent
methods,” Psychiatry Res., vol. 55, pp. 153-166, 1994.
[9] J. Wackermann, D. Lehmann, C.M. Michel and W.K. Strik, “Adaptive
segmentation of spontaneous EEG map series into spatially defined
microstates,” Int. J. Psychophys., vol. 14, pp. 269-283, 1993.
[10] D. Lehmann and W. Skrandies, “Segmentation of evoked potentials
based on spatial field configuration in multichannel recordings,” In W.C.
McCallum, R. Zappoli and F. Denoth (eds.) Cerebral Psychophysiology:
Studies in Event-Related Potentials. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, Suppl.38., pp. 506-512, 1986.

188

