Culture and Brain
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40167-018-0073-3
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat
in culturally tight and loose contexts: a cross‑cultural
comparison of Germany versus Russia
Liza Prentice1 · Johannes Klackl1 · Dmitrij Agroskin1 · Igor Grossmann2 ·
Yuri Alexandrov3,4 · Vladimir Apanovich3 · Boris Bezdenezhnykh3 · Eva Jonas1
Accepted: 8 November 2018
© The Author(s) 2018

Abstract
Prior research shows that North Americans and Western Europeans react to threats
with defensive strategies based on behavioral approach vs. inhibition systems (BAS/
BIS)—i.e., a desire to approach a goal or to avoid a threat. In the present research,
we explored whether this phenomenon is more pronounced in tight cultures (e.g.,
Germany) as compared to loose cultures (e.g., Russia), testing how Germans and
Russians respond to societal threats. We expected that due to the higher levels of
cultural tightness, Germans would show stronger defensive reactions to threats than
Russians. Additionally, we investigated the role of need for tightness (i.e., need for
strict regulation of social order) in threat management processes. In Study 1, Germans recalling violations of societal norms produced stronger rightward bias on the
line bisection task than Russians, indicative of greater BAS activation in Germans
than in Russians. In Study 2, we used frontal alpha asymmetry, providing the first
cross-cultural test of BIS-BAS reactions utilizing neuronal markers. In this study,
presentation of societal threat in a video portraying Islamic immigration as a largescale violation of social norms led to higher BIS activation among Germans than
among Russians, if their need for tightness was high. We discuss the role of tightness, need for tightness, and type of threat for cross-cultural particularities of threatinduced motivational shifts.
Keywords Threat · BIS · BAS · Tightness · Need for tightness

* Liza Prentice
elizaveta.prokhorova@sbg.ac.at
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

L. Prentice et al.

Introduction
In the last decade, citizens in many European countries have faced a range of
societal threats. For instance, after the conflicts in Ukraine over the course of
the last years, Russian citizens were disappointed by several rounds of sanctions
imposed by the EU, United States, and other countries. External pressure and
increasing political tension accompanied by deterioration of the Russian economic situation have had serious repercussions on the prevailing climate in Russia (Ivanov et al. 2016). The years were also not easy for Germany. Recent events
in Germany include the shooting in the shopping mall in Munich on July 22,
2016, and the Berlin market massacre on December 19, 2016. Combined with the
massive influx of refugees from the Middle East, those incendiary tragedies had
a strong negative impact on the citizens’ feeling of safety, exacerbated by mass
media. Concerns about such threats can impact individuals on two different levels
(Huddy et al. 2016). On the one hand, people see such situations as interpersonal
threats to their individual well-being. On the other hand, these situations can constitute societal threats to a larger social group and undermine groups’ well-being.
For example, for many Russian citizens, the international sanctions on Russia
resulted in unemployment and financial difficulties (Khamatkhanova 2015). Furthermore, such sanctions continue to foster the growing isolation of Russia from
Western countries and hinder its cooperation with the latter (Wang 2015).
In the present paper, we want to shed light on how culture influences person’s
reactions to societal threats. In this context, cultural tightness—i.e., the strength
of social norms (Gelfand et al. 2006), seems to be particularly relevant. Since
tightness can emerge at a societal level as a consequence of past threat (Gelfand
et al. 2011), it is likely to determine peoples’ cognition and behavior, as well as
neural activity in the face of a current threat. The present research aims to compare people from Germany and Russia, cultures with different levels of tightness
(Gelfand et al. 2011), in their threat responses.
Culture and threat vigilance
Psychological research suggests that people react to societal and interpersonal
threats using a variety of defensive behaviors and cognitions. For example, threat
promotes ethnocentrism (e.g., Burke et al. 2010), reliance on stereotypes (Bodenhausen et al. 1994), and punitiveness against criminals (e.g., Proulx et al. 2012).
People appear to use these kinds of defensive strategies with the aim to relieve anxiety caused by perceived threats and to restore equanimity (Jonas et al. 2014). Similar
defensive intentions have been observed across a range of cultures (e.g., Heine et al.
2002; Tam et al. 2007), suggesting the universality of defensiveness in the face of
threat.
At the same time, cultural particularities appear to influence specific threat management processes. Depending on cultural norms, political ideology, values, and
religious beliefs, problematic situations can be perceived as more or less threatening and cause defensive reactions of different strength (e.g., Sallivan and Nonaka

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

1988; Yang et al. 2013; Schneider and De Meyer 1991). For example, cultural values such as solidarity and pride have been shown to facilitate effective coping with
experienced threatening events (Moscardino et al. 2007). Similarly, cultural differences in independent versus interdependent self-construal modulate reactions to a
self-related threat such that independent self-construal was related to stronger selfprotective responses (Brockner and Chen 1996).
Given the cultural differences between Western countries and Russia (e.g., Kühnen et al. 2001; Naumov 1996), we can expect different reactions to threats also in
these cultures. For example, prior research demonstrates that Russians display less
distress while reflecting over a recent negative experience compared to Americans
(Grossmann and Kross 2010). Further, it was shown that Russian culture promotes
greater vigilance in response to negative stimuli (in terms of time spent and speed of
stimuli recognition) as compared to Western cultures (Grossmann et al. 2012).
In the present paper, we argue that cultural tightness is a key factor underlying
cultural differences in people’s responses to societal threats. As compared to looseness, tightness is defined as the strength of social norms and sanctions typical for
the country (Gelfand et al. 2006), which is influenced by numerous distal ecological and historical threats, and socio-political practices (Gelfand et al. 2011). Tight
cultures like Germany can generally be described as cultures with many strict social
norms and low tolerance for deviant behavior, while loose cultures like Russia1 have
few social rules and accept in general more deviant behavior (Gelfand et al. 2011).
Tightness-looseness affects many areas of life: Tight countries have stricter parent–child-relationships (e.g., Halloway 1999), high-monitoring education strategies
(e.g., Holzer 2000), and more media control (Sussman and Karlekar 2002). Moreover, development of several personality traits is at least partly affected by tightnesslooseness: People in tight societies are generally more conforming, have a higher
need for stability, and prefer to avoid risks (Gelfand et al. 2006).
Having such a big impact on individuals, tightness can also be a major factor in
the context of threat responses. Prior research supports this idea, detecting culturespecific neuronal responses to a societal threat. Specifically, in a study investigating
event-related potentials, culturally tight Chinese but not culturally loose US-Americans responded to social norm violation with an increased frontal N400—i.e., a neuronal marker of norm violation detection (Mu et al. 2015).
Behavioral inhibition and approach systems
Research on the motivational dynamics underlying threat and defense suggests
that responding to threat involves two main motivational systems: avoidance and
approach (Jonas et al. 2014). For some individuals, threat activates a behavioral

1
Consistent with prior research (Gelfand et al. 2011), in our other work (Prokhorova et al. 2018), we
have found evidence that Germany is significantly higher in tightness than Russia, t(127) = − 3.16,
p = .002, d = 0.54 (NGER = 66, NRU = 63; MGER = 4.22, SDGER = 0.59, MRU = 3.89, SDRU = 0.62;
answers were given on the six-point Likert scale). The study implied that Germany can be regarded as a
tight and Russia as a loose culture.

13

L. Prentice et al.

inhibition system (BIS; Gray 1982; Gray and McNaughton 2000). Accompanied by
anxiety, BIS inhibits all current goal approach behavior and produces vigilance and
avoidance, the adaptive purpose of which is to gather information about possible
sources of threats and to avoid undesirable consequences (Jonas et al. 2014). At the
neuronal level, BIS is associated with higher right frontal cortex activity (Agroskin
et al. 2016; Harmon-Jones et al. 2010; Klackl et al. 2017).
For other individuals, threat activates behavioral approach system (BAS; Gray
1982; Gray and McNaughton 2000). BAS activation is associated with relative left
frontal cortical activity (Harmon-Jones et al. 2010). Accompanied by either positive
affects like hope, excitement, and eagerness (Corr et al. 2013) or negative affect like
anger (Carver and Harmon-Jones 2009), BAS moves individuals towards a solution
of the problem. However, if the solution is unavailable, people will undertake palliative or symbolic defensive strategies (e.g., affirming values), which do not solve the
problem itself but nevertheless relieve anxiety (Jonas et al. 2014).
Whether people primarily engage BIS or BAS as a response to a threat seems
to differ greatly depending on the type of threat at hand. For instance, freedom
restrictions elicit immediate BAS activation (Steindl et al. 2016), whereas other
threats like mortality salience and control deprivation cause immediate BIS activation (Agroskin et al. 2016; Klackl et al. 2017). Notably, the exact determinants
of whether and when threat leads to BIS or BAS activation remain unclear, raising the question how contextual factors such as cultural tightness impact BIS/BAS
activation.
The role of cultural tightness for approach‑avoidance motivations
There are theoretical reasons as well as empirical evidence for the impact of tightness on threat management. In general, we assume that people from tight cultures
are more defensive in the face of threats than people from loose cultures. Depending
on the nature of a threat, people from tight cultures may react to it either with higher
BIS or higher BAS activation, as compared to people from loose cultures.
Tightness may amplify BIS-related responses to threats because people in tight
societies have a clear idea of appropriate behavior and low tolerance of deviant behavior. They advocate established rules and expect others to follow them.
Accordingly, people in tight cultures may experience situations as more threatening
than people in less tight (i.e., loose) cultures because their views of “how things
should be” get violated more easily. According to the anxiety-to-approach model
(Jonas et al. 2014), it is possible that people from tight countries respond with higher
BIS activation to a threat compared to people from less tight countries because
threats invoke more substantial conflict and contradict expectations to a greater
extent. Previous research hints to a possible connection between the level of tightness and BIS reaction to a threatening stimulus: Mrazek et al. (2013) relate tightness
to a specific genetic polimorphism,2 which was previously associated with increased
2
The authors explore the serotonin transporter gene SLC6A4, in particular, a short allele of its promoter
length polymorphic region known as 5-HTTLPR.

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

harm avoidance (Munafò et al. 2005), anxiety (Lonsdorf et al. 2009), and attentional
bias to negative information (Munafò et al. 2009) when facing a stressful event. All
these parameters correspond to the typical outputs of BIS.
Tightness can also amplify BAS-related responses to threats as it provides clear
rules and norms that clarify how one should behave to overcome a threat and in this
way reduces anxiety (Gelfand et al. 2006). In particular, it is possible that despite
evaluating problematic situation as more threatening, people in tight (vs. loose)
cultures can find ways to deal with problems more easily, which results in stronger
approach motivation (i.e., BAS activation). Prior research provides some support for
this hypothesis. For instance, individual difference studies have demonstrated that
people with higher sensitivity to unfair treatment (a type of norm violation) experience more anger and outrage and demonstrate more prosocial behavior when facing a threat, which points to BAS-activation (e.g., Schmitt et al. 2009). Studies on
Chinese samples demonstrate that people from this rather tight culture react to societal threats with high social coordination (i.e., the ability to effectively synchronize
actions), which is another example of solution-oriented BAS responses (Mu et al.
2017).
Putting these insights together, we expect people from tight cultures to show
stronger threat-specific defensive reactions, which can be aligned either with BIS or
BAS activation.
Tightness versus need for tightness
Besides tightness itself, one can also speculate that the strength of BIS-BAS reactions might be determined by the extent to which people report being in need for
new norms and solutions, a construct that we call need for tightness. Whereas tightness typically describes the perception of existing norms and regulations in a society, need for tightness describes how strict norms and regulations ought to be. It
is noteworthy that need for tightness does not have to correspond to the perceived
level of societal tightness, similar to how perceived consensus in a culture does
not need to correspond to personal beliefs (Zou et al. 2009). In fact, one may even
expect compensatory processes where low perceived tightness in the society may
correspond to high need for tightness. Interested in this new construct, we sought
to explore whether need for tightness has an impact on reactions to societal threats.
In particular, we speculate that people with high need for tightness may feel more
anxiety and be more sensitive to societal threats because their need for regulation
is violated. Thus, we assume that people with high need for tightness may show
stronger BIS response in the face of threat, as compared to people with low need for
tightness.
The present research
The aim of the present research is to compare people with tight and loose cultural backgrounds in their reactions to societal threats, using German and Russian
cultural contexts as a case study. We conducted two experiments to investigate

13

L. Prentice et al.

culture-specific responses to societal threats. We predicted that people in culturally tight Germany would show a stronger defensive reaction to societal threats (i.e.,
BIS or BAS activation) than people in culturally loose Russia. We did not specify
whether it would be BIS or BAS reaction because at the time of the data collection, there was no research demonstrating that societal threats caused one of these
responses specifically. Additionally, we examined whether people with high need
for tightness would show a stronger BIS reaction to societal threats than people with
low need for tightness. Given the novelty of the need for tightness instrument, we
treated this second part as exploratory.
In Study 1, participants were dealing with a threat directly related to existing
rules: Violation of social norms. Participants recalled examples of norm violations.
We explored subsequent BIS-BAS activity, using self-report measures of affect, and
the line bisection task (Jewell and McCourt 2000), which is a perceptual measure
of relative frontal activity (Nash et al. 2010). In Study 2, we used another type of
societal threat and another measure of BIS-BAS activation. In this study, we induced
threat, using a video clip suggesting that the influx of Muslim refugees would lead
to global Islamization. Similarly to reactions to social norm violations, attitudes
towards immigrants are related to the level of cultural tightness (e.g., Harrington and
Gelfand 2014). However, the collective threat of global Islamization has a broader
character and may require new norms for its regulation, which explains our interest in it. In Study 2, we investigated BIS-BAS reactions, using EEG to assess frontal brain activity as a neuronal marker of these processes. The line bisection bias
and frontal EEG alpha asymmetry as markers of BIS-BAS activation were related
in prior research (Nash et al. 2010). Thus, overall, we explored BIS and BAS, using
both indirect and direct measures of neuronal activity associated with BIS-BAS
processes.

Study 1
In Study 1, we aimed to test if people from a tight culture (Germany) show stronger
responses to a threat (i.e., BIS-BAS activity) compared to people from a less tight
culture (Russia), using social transgressions as a threat. For exploratory reasons, we
also investigated a possible impact of need for tightness. We conducted the norm
violation manipulation twice, using two different perspectives: Participants had to
imagine and describe, first, a situation when they broke a rule, and later on, a situation when they witnessed someone else break a rule.3
To investigate BIS-BAS activity, we used a behavioral measure of relative frontal hemisphericity: the line bisection task (Jewell and McCourt 2000). The LBT

3
For exploratory purposes, we included two types of social transgressions to compare cultures in such
reactions as shame and guilt, which are typical for self-caused wrongdoing but are not directly connected
to BIS-BAS. Although the analysis confirmed that participants in the transgressor condition expressed
higher shame and guilt than participants in the observer condition (ps < .001), we did not observe significant cultural differences in either shame or guild-related reactions (all ps > .406).

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

measures the extent to which people’s perception of horizontal lines is biased to the
right or left visual fields. Right- or leftward bias reflects relatively higher activity of
left and right frontal cortex, respectively. Thus, the LBT has previously been used as
a measure of BIS and BAS states (Agroskin et al. 2016; Nash et al. 2010). Additionally, we measured self-reported BIS-related emotions.
Method
Participants
Participants were 71 people from Russia and 67 people from Germany/Austria (53
Germans).4 Since German and Austrian cultures share a great overlap in their mentalities as well as a similar level of tightness (Gelfand et al. 2011) we combined
participants from these cultures into one group. The age of participants ranged from
17 to 62 in Russia (M = 25.20, SD = 10.72) and from 17 to 65 in Germany/Austria
(M = 26.49, SD = 9.31). In both cultural groups, there were more female than male
participants: 64 and 50, respectively. The majority of participants were students
(NRU = 36; NGER/AU = 50). The study was approved by the ethics committee of the
University of Salzburg. All participants signed informed consent and could withdraw participation at any point, although no participant made use of this option.
Procedure and materials
The Russian- and German-language questionnaires were presented via Questback
software (QuestBack, Oslo, Norway). All measures were translated from German to
Russian and back by independent bilingual graduate students, following established
procedures (Grossmann and Na 2014). We recruited participants in the year 2013
through social networks Facebook and Vkontakte (a Russian on-line social network
system comparable to Facebook in design and features). Participation in the study
was voluntary and anonymous. All participants were informed about the confidentiality of their data.
Line bisection task (LBT) The questionnaire included four parts. After a brief introduction and instructions, participants completed the first LBT (αRU = .98, αGER/AU = .76),
which we used as a baseline measure. In this task, participants had to mark the perceived center point of ten horizontal lines, which varied in size and screen positions. The lines were between 45 and 100 mm long. Participants could bisect the
lines at positions 1–100 (see Glicksohn and Kinberg 2009 who used a similar procedure). We calculated bisection bias by averaging deviations from the line centers

4
The whole sample consisted of 167 people from Russia and 173 people from Germany/Austria. However, some participants completed the survey following different instructions, which did not correspond
to the aim of the present research. Specifically, they filled in the fourth part of the questionnaire (see
description below) right after the first LBT. Thus, the delay between the first and the second/third LBT
was too long to use the first LBT as a baseline.

13

L. Prentice et al.

(see Klackl et al. 2017). Negative scores indicated stronger leftward bisection bias or
relative right hemisphericity indicative of avoidance motivation. Positive LBT-scores
indexed higher BAS activation.
Manipulation and affect measure Following the first LBT, participants read a definition of social norms accompanied with several examples. Then, we asked them
to recall and describe a past situation in which they broke an existing social rule
(Norm violation: Transgressor) and to answer two open-ended questions about that
situation (“Please try to remember a situation in which you violated a certain social
norm. Describe this situation in a few sentences. What were your thoughts and feelings in this situation? How did other people react?”). Right after that, participants
completed the second LBT (αRU = .99, αGER/AU = .75), which was identical to the first
LBT except that the lines were shuffled. Next, participants assessed how much each
of 18 given affect items reflected their feelings in the described situation, using a
5-point Likert scale (from 1, “absolutely not” to 5, “absolutely”, see “Appendix 1”).
We were interested in four items that represented an affective side of BIS reaction
and corresponded to the BIS Affect Scale (Agroskin et al. 2016), namely uncertainty,
anxiety, nervousness, and confusion (αRU = .79, αGER/AU = .80). Then, participants
evaluated the perceived severity of the norm violation in the described situation (one
item “How severe was the norm violation you described” from 1, “absolutely not
severe”, to 6, “very severe”).
In the third part of the questionnaire, participants had to recall a situation in which
they witnessed someone else breaking a social rule (Norm violation: Observer).
After giving a brief description, participants answered two open-ended questions:
“What were your thoughts and feelings in this situation?” and “How did you react
to this situation?” Following that, participants completed the third LBT (αRU = .96,
αGER/AU = .69), the affect scale (αRU = .74, αGER/AU = .79 for the BIS subscale), and
evaluated the severity of the norm violation. We balanced the order of “Norm violation: Transgressor” and “Norm violation: Observer” parts between the subjects.
Tightness and need for tightness The fourth part contained demographics, several
traits measures,5 the Edinburgh handedness inventory, αRU = .53, αGER/AU = .87 (Oldfield 1971), and a short compliance check. Then, we measured a perceived level of
cultural tightness, using the Tightness-Looseness Scale (Gelfand et al. 2011). Example items were “There are many social norms that people are supposed to abide by in
[the country]” or “People in [the country] almost always comply with social norms.”
Responses were given on a 1 (“Totally disagree”) to 6 (“Totally agree”) scale. The
original six-item version of the scale exhibited a low level of internal consistency
(αRU = .45, αGER/AU = .49). We removed the fourth item “People in this country have

5
In Study 1, we additionally administered the BIS/BAS-Trait Scale (Carver and White 1994), the International Personality Item Pool (Goldberg 2001), the Personal Need for Structure Scale (Thompson et al.
1992), and the Self-Monitoring Scale (Lennox and Wolfe 1984). Since BIS/BAS trait can be related to
BIS/BAS state, we included it into analysis (αRU = .75, αGER/AU = .78). However, we did not find any
significant main effects or interactions involving BIS/BAS trait, all ps > .10.

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

a great deal of freedom in deciding how they want to behave in most situations”
(reverse coded) in order to improve the internal reliability (αRU = .55, αGER/AU = .60).6
Additionally, we measured need for tightness, using a four-item scale inspired by
the Tightness-Looseness scale. The wording of the items was changed to indicate
how things ought to be in the respective country (e.g., “There should be many social
norms that people are supposed to abide by in [the country]”). The modified version
of the scale (αRU = .80, αGER/AU = .68) is presented in “Appendix 2”.
Results and discussion
As a first step, we compared the two cultural samples regarding the level of tightness
and need for tightness. Consistent with previous research (Gelfand et al. 2011), German/Austrian participants perceived their culture to be tighter than Russian participants did (MGER/AU = 4.33, SDGER/AU = 0.57, MRU = 3.50, SDRU = 0.67), t(133) = 7.83,
p < .001, d = 1.33.7 Conversely, Germans/Austrians expressed lower need for tightness than Russians (MGER/AU = 3.51, SDGER/AU = 0.80, MRU = 3.93, SDRU = 0.91),
t(120) = − 2.69, p = .008, d = 0.49. Notably, the two constructs appeared orthogonal,
rRU = .23, pRU = .08, rGER/AU = .18, pGER/AU = .17.
We also compared how participants with different cultural backgrounds evaluated
the severity of different types of norm violation (transgressor vs. observer). Participants from both cultural groups rated situations in which somebody else broke a rule
as significantly more severe than situations in which they broke a rule themselves
(MGER/AUtrans = 3.12, SDGER/AUtrans = 1.40, MGER/AUobs = 3.91, SDGER/AUobs = 1.36,
MRUtrans = 2.90, SDRUtrans = 1.51, MRUobs = 4.06, SDRUobs = 1.48), F(1, 136) = 57.20,
p < .001, η2p = .30. Importantly, the main effect of culture (p = .863), as well as the
Culture × Norm violation type interaction (p = .160), was non-significant. Inclusion
of the order of the manipulations as a covariate in the analysis had no significant
influence on the results.
Next, we tested whether people from Germany and Austria differed in their line
bisection responses to threat from people from Russia. We employed a 2 (Russia vs.
Germany/Austria) × 2 (LBT 2 vs. LBT 3) mixed effects general linear model with
the first LBT as a covariate. We included only right-handed participants in the analysis to control for hemispheric differences correlated with handedness (e.g., Drake
and Myers 2006). To correct for outliers, we took only the LBT-trials in which participants put the mark at the central 20 percent of the lines. The resulted sample
consisted of 57 Russians and 57 Germans/Austrians. The analysis revealed a significant main effect of culture, F(1, 111) = 4.85, p = .030, η2p = .042, showing that German/Austrian participants responded with higher LBT-scores indicative of increased
approach (BAS) compared to Russian participants after both norm violation

6
Despite our attempts to improve the internal reliability of the scale, it still stayed on a relatively low
level. However, some literature justifies viewing the range of .5 to .6 as the minimally acceptable reliability level (see Peterson 1994).
7
In all analyses, we controlled for gender, age, and occupation. Inclusion of these covariates did not
influence any of the reported results.

13

L. Prentice et al.
0.9
0.8

LBT-score

0.7
0.6
0.5

Germany/Austria

0.4

Russia

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Norm violation:
Transgressor

Norm violation:
Observer

Fig. 1  After recalling social transgressions, Germans/Austrians showed higher LBT-scores (i.e. more
BAS-related approach) compared to Russians. Error bars represent ± 1 SEM

types (MGER/AUtrans = 0.72, SDGER/AUtrans = 1.15, MRUtrans = 0.22; SDRUtrans = 1.14,
MGER/AUobs = 0.70, SDGER/AUobs = 1.26, MRUobs = 0.41, SDRUobs = 1.40), see Fig. 1.
The effect of the norm violation type (p = .828), as well as the Culture × Norm Violation Type interaction (p = .220), was non-significant. We conducted a similar analysis, controlling for the order of the manipulations. Inclusion of the covariate had no
impact on the reported results.
To test if tightness could explain the revealed effect of culture on bisection bias,
we employed two mediation analyses, using the PROCESS macro for SPSS (Model
4; Hayes 2016). The analyses explored the underlying mechanism by which a predictor (culture) influenced an outcome (LBT 2 or LBT 3) through a mediator (cultural tightness). Contrary to our expectations, the analyses did not reveal an indirect
effect of culture through tightness neither on LBT 2, b = − 0.16; SE = 0.15; 95% BC
CI [− 0.50; 0.10], nor on LBT 3, b = − 0.14; SE = 0.31; 95% BC CI [− 0.99; 0.29].
For exploratory reasons, we tested whether need for tightness might moderate
the impact of culture on the line bisection responses and performed a moderation
analysis, using the PROCESS macro for SPSS (Model 1; Hayes 2016). We considered culture as a predictor, need for tightness as a moderator, and LBT-scores as
an outcome. We performed separate analyses for the transgressor and the observer
condition. However, we found no Culture × Need for Tightness interactions at LBT 2
(p = .712) or LBT 3 (p = .385).
As another marker of BIS activation, we used self-reported BIS affect. We conducted a similar 2 (Russia vs. Germany/Austria) × 2 (transgressor vs. observer)
mixed effects general linear model. We included right-handed and left-handed participants in the analysis. The test revealed a main effect of norm violation type, F(1,
136) = 7.33, p = .008, η2p = .051, indicating that recalling situations in which one broke
a rule caused more BIS-related emotions than situations when one observed how
somebody else broke a rule. However, this effect appeared to be non-significant when
controlling for the order of the manipulations, F(1, 135) = 0.91, p = .342, η2p = .007.
Utilizing both analytical strategies, we found neither a main effect of culture nor
a Culture × Norm Violation Type interaction, all ps > .275 Mean values demonstrated that participants from both cultural groups did not express strong BIS-related

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

emotions (MGER/AUtrans = 2.28, SDGER/AUtrans = 0.99, MRUtrans = 2.32, SDRUtrans = 1.03,
MGER/AUobs = 2.01, SDGER/AUobs = 0.91, MRUobs = 2.09, SDRUobss = 0.97).
Additional analyses
We also examined if the two cultural groups differed in any other emotions measured by the affect scale. We observed a significant main effect of the culture regarding sadness, F(1, 132) = 22.94, p < .001, η2p = .15, indicating that Russian participants experienced more sadness compared to German participants independent of
the transgression type (MGER/AUtrans = 1.67, SDGER/AUtrans = 1.06, MRUtrans = 2.37,
SDRUtrans = 1.40,
MGER/AUobs = 1.81,
SDGER/AUobs = 1.08,
MRUobs = 2.84,
SDRUobs = 1.48). The transgression type main effect was also significant, F(1,
132) = 5.74, p = .018, η2p = .042, showing that participants in the “Norm violation:
Observer” condition expressed more sadness. However, this effect appeared to be
non-significant when controlling for the order of the manipulations, p = .119. We
did not find any significant results with regard to the Culture × Norm Violation Type
interaction, all ps > .175
Discussion
In line with our hypothesis, German/Austrian participants showed a stronger threat
response than Russian participants. Specifically, Germans/Austrians exhibited
stronger rightward bisection bias indicative of BAS activation in response to norm
violations, as compared to Russians. BAS rather than BIS reaction to such societal
threat as norm violation is in line with prior research. For instance, previous studies demonstrated that anger and outrage, which are emotions associated with BAS,
are typical reactions to norm violation (e.g., Boll 1998). However, individual differences in tightness did not mediate the effect of culture on BAS response. There are
two issues to consider. First, the Tightness-Looseness Scale (Gelfand et al. 2011)
we used in Study 1 measures individual differences, which may not necessarily correspond to cultural differences (Na et al. 2010). Second, the scale exhibited a rather
low level of internal reliability, raising questions about measurement equivalence of
this scale across cultures. We also did not find any effects of need for tightness.
Study 1 also showed that participants from both cultures assessed own transgressions as less severe than transgressions of others. This effect seems to be a simple
example of cognitive dissonance reduction (Festinger 1957). Additionally, the study
revealed that Russians experienced more sadness than Germans in both conditions.
Although our hypotheses did not touch upon sadness, we found this effect interesting
also in the context of the present research because it sheds light on possible reactions to
threats in Russia. Prior research demonstrates that Russians report more sadness experiences compared to Americans and hints to a special meaning of sadness in Russia
(Chentsova-Dutton 2011; Consedine and Magai 2002). There is also some empirical
evidence that Russians tend to brood and be melancholic (e.g., Grossmann and Kross
2010). Thus, higher sadness might reflect melancholic states typical for Russians.

13

L. Prentice et al.

The findings of Study 1 provide initial support to the prediction that reactions to
threat should be more pronounced among tight cultures (Germany/Austria) relative
to loose cultures (Russia). In Study 2, we wanted to replicate these results, using a
direct measure of BIS-BAS activity and a broader societal threat.

Study 2
Based on Study 1, Study 2 further compared Russians and Germans in their reaction
to a societal threat and explored the possible effects of tightness and need for tightness. In contrast to Study 1, in which we used a small-scale manipulation of threat
(i.e., self- and other-caused transgressions), we used a large-scale threat that should
be perceived as a collective risk. For this reason, we used a video stimulus that created an impression of a growing Islamization of Europe. Whereas in Study 1 we
relied on the line bisection task (LBT) as a marker of BIS-BAS responses, in Study
2, we used electroencephalography (EEG) to measure frontal alpha asymmetry, a
neuronal index of left- and right-lateralization indicative of BIS and BAS processes.
As in Study 1, we expected people from culturally tight Germany to respond more
strongly to threat.
Method
Participants
The sample consisted of 41 persons from Russia (21 males, 20 females) and 52 persons from Germany (10 males, 42 females) ranging in age from 17 and 54 in Russia (M = 22.54, SD = 7.75) and from 18 to 33 in Germany (M = 22.17, SD = 3.14).
In both groups, the majority of participants were students (NRU = 31; NGER = 51).
The study was approved by the ethics committee of the University of Salzburg. All
participants signed informed consent and could withdraw participation at any point,
although no participant made use of this option.
Procedure and materials
The data were collected in the year 2014 at the University of Salzburg and the Institute of Psychology of the Russian Academy of Sciences. We invited participants
to the lab where they underwent EEG recordings and filled in an online questionnaire. All participants gave written informed consent to participate in the study and
received monetary reward or course credits for participation.
Manipulation After a brief introduction, participants underwent a 90-second EEG
recording trial (the EEG procedure is described below in full detail). Then, participants watched threat and control videos in counterbalanced order. The threat video
was about growing Islamization of Europe (Jack 2015). Accompanied by the song of
a Muezzin, it painted a picture of a steep growth in Muslim population in Europe in

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

the nearest future. According to the video, in 2050, Germany would be an Islamic
country, and every fifth person in Russia would be a Muslim. The control video was
about environment-friendly production and recycling of paper (Antalis 2015). The
videos were presented in English with German or Russian subtitles. Both videos were
about three minutes in length (2:39 and 3:03, respectively).
EEG recording After each video, participants underwent a 90-second EEG recording.
Participants were instructed to think about the video during the recording. Next, participants performed a passive 3-stimulus auditory oddball task for about two minutes.
This task was used to assess whether culture and/or perceived tightness affected the
oddball P300. No reliable effects were discovered. After this task, participants underwent another 90-second EEG recording. Thus, the interval between the two videos
was about five minutes. To investigate possible carryover effects, we included the
order of the videos as a covariate in our statistical analyses.
At the both study locations, we used the same14-channel Emotiv EEG neuroheadset and Emotiv TestBench software (Emotiv Systems Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA) to record data with a sampling rate of 128 Hz. We recorded data from sites
AF3, AF4, F3, F4, F7, F8, FC5, FC6, P7, P8, T7, T8, O1, and O2. EEG data were
re-referenced to an average of electrodes T7 and T8 and filtered (high/pass cutoff:
0.1 Hz, Slope: 24 db/Oct; low-pass cutoff: 30 Hz, Slope: 24 db/Oct). We calculated
frontal asymmetry scores for each 90 s recording period by segmenting each 90 s
segment into 2 s segments with 1.5 s overlap. We only included epochs in which
the difference between two values in a moving 200 ms interval did not exceed 100
microvolts and the signal was between -100 and +100 microvolts. The 2 s segments
were Fourier transformed (Fast Fourier Transform, 10% Hamming Window, frequency resolution 0.5 Hz), and the resulting power spectra were averaged. Finally,
individual frontal alpha (8-13 Hz) asymmetry for each epoch was calculated (log
F8 − log F7). These electrodes are known to provide the best fit in predicting behavioral responses on the line bisection bias (Nash et al. 2010).
To prepare alpha asymmetry data to the primary analyses, we calculated unstandardized residuals using pre-video asymmetry scores as predictors of post-video
asymmetry scores. Negative values indexed relative right frontal asymmetry (RFA)
and thus, indicated BIS. Positive values indexed relative left frontal asymmetry
(LFA) and thus, were markers of BAS (e.g., Harmon-Jones et al. 2010).
Tightness and need for tightness After the EEG-recording, participants completed an
online questionnaire, which we created, using Questback software (QuestBack, Oslo,
Norway). As in Study 1, we used the Edinburgh handedness inventory, αRU = .84;
αGER = .72 (Oldfield 1971), the Tightness-Looseness Scale (αRU = .63, αGER = .55)
without item 4 (Gelfand et al. 2011), and the Need for Tightness Scale (αRU = .73,
αGER = .56). Next, participants completed several traits measures8 and described their
8

In Study 2, we additionally used the Transgression Scale (based on Gelfand et al. 2011), the RIC Scale
(Kashima and Hardie 2000), the BIS/BAS-Trait Scale (Carver and White 1994), the Ethnocentrism Scale
(Bizumic et al. 2009), five items about anti-Muslim dispositions, and eight items about an attitude to
Russian policy. As in Study 1, we included BIS/BAS trait in preliminary analyses (αRU = .78, αGER =
.67) but did not find any significant effects, all ps >.10. Since negative evaluation of transgressions might

13

L. Prentice et al.

thoughts about the videos. Finally, participants completed short manipulation and
compliance checks. The seven-item manipulation check measured how alarming participants found the threat (αRU = .86, αGER = .78) and control (αRU = .74, αGER = .81)
videos (e.g., “To what extent did the video make you feel worried?”) on a 1 (“Absolutely not”) to 5 (“Very”) scale. All measures were translated from German to Russian and back by independent bilingual graduate students, following established procedures (Grossmann and Na 2014).
Results and discussion
Similar to Study 1, we first compared two cultural groups in the level of perceived
tightness and need for tightness. In line with our expectations, Russians rated
their culture as less tight than Germans did (MRU = 3.72, SDRU = 0.78, MGER = 4.5,
SDGER = 0.47), t(91) = 5.92, p < .001, d = 1.21. At the same time, Russians
showed higher need for tightness scores than Germans (MRU = 3.81, SDRU = 0.94,
MGER = 3.38, SDGER = 0.69), t(91) = 2.55, p = .013, d = 0.52. As in Study 1, tightness and need for tightness were not correlated, rRU = .17, pRU = .30, rGER/AU = .21,
pGER/AU = .13.
Prior to the main analysis, we also tested whether participants viewed Islamization as a threatening issue. The manipulation check revealed that participants in
both cultures found the Islamization video more threatening than the paper video, as
revealed by a significant main effect of threat (Misl = 2.78, SDisl = 0.70, Mpap = 1.80,
SDpap = 0.51), F(1, 90) = 11.61, p = .001, η2p = .11, in the absence of a culture main
effect or an interaction, all ps > .275.
To test our hypothesis about differences between loose Russia and tight Germany
in reactions to threat, we employed a 2 (Russia vs. Germany) × 2 (threat vs. control video) mixed effects general linear model. After artifact rejection and exclusion
of left-handed participants, the sample consisted of 24 Russians and 34 Germans.
The analysis did not reveal any differences in alpha asymmetry between the Russian and the German sample, F(1, 56) = 1.51, p = .225, η2p = .026, or between the two
conditions, F(1, 56) = 0.19, p = .891, η2p = .001. The Culture × Condition interaction
was also not significant, F(1, 56) = 0.08, p = .931, η2p = .001. Inclusion of the order of
manipulations as a covariate did not change the results.
For exploratory reasons, we tested whether need for tightness might determine the impact of culture on frontal alpha asymmetry and performed a moderation analysis, using the PROCESS macro for SPSS (Model 1; Hayes 2016). We
considered culture as a predictor, need for tightness as a moderator, and frontal
asymmetry scores as an outcome. We performed separate analyses for the experimental and the control condition. In the threat condition, we found a significant
Culture × Need for Tightness interaction, see Table 1. There was a difference in

Footnote 8 (continued)
be a hallmark of cultural tightness, we also compared the two cultural samples with regard to the Transgression Scale (αRU = .84, αGER = .89). However, the difference between the cultures was non-significant, t(91) = 1.24, p =.22, d = 0.25.

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…
Table 1  Frontal alpha
asymmetry scores predicted
from culture and need for
tightness

Frontal alpha asymmetry scores

LFA

RFA

Predictor

b

SE

t

p

Constant

− 0.03

0.04

− 0.80

.43

Need for tightness

− 0.12

0.05

− 2.53

.015

Culture

− 0.12

0.07

− 1.61

.11

Need for tightness × culture

− 0.21

0.09

− 2.40

.020

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05

Russia

0

Germany

-0.05
-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25

Low
Need for Tightness

High
Need for Tightness

Fig. 2  After watching a threatening video about Islamization, Germans showed lower alpha asymmetry
scores (i.e. more BIS) compared to Russians, but only when need for tightness was high. LFA left frontal
asymmetry, RFA right frontal asymmetry

alpha asymmetry scores between the two cultures, if need for tightness was high,
b = − 0.29, SE = 0.11, t(54) = − 2.64, p = .010, but not low, b = 0.05, SE = 0.10,
t(54) = 0.54, p = .59. In particular, German participants with high need for tightness had lower LFA scores indicating a stronger BIS reaction to the Islamization
video than Russian participants. In Russia, need for tightness had no impact on
frontal asymmetry scores, see Fig. 2.
In the control condition, the moderation analysis revealed no significant
effect (p = .709). All results remained the same when controlling for the order of
manipulations.
As in Study 1, we compared the two cultural samples in experienced sadness
for exploratory reasons. To do so, we used one item included in the manipulation check: “To what extent did the video make you feel sad?” We analyzed the
data of all participants and employed a similar 2 × 2 mixed effects general linear
model. We found a significant Culture × Condition interaction, F(1, 91) = 11.46,
p = .001, ηp2 = .11, showing that in the Islamization condition, Russian participants experienced more sadness than German participants, p < .001 (MRU = 2.93,
SDRU = 1.23, MGER/AU = 1.81, SDGER/AU = 0.89). In the paper condition, there were
no differences between Russian and German participants, p = .178.

13

L. Prentice et al.

Additional analysis of the open‑ended questions
In Study 2, we also asked participants to describe their thoughts and feelings about
the problem of growing Islamization of Europe. We assumed that this information might help us to understand the revealed differences in reactions to the threat.
To analyze the answers, we recruited 34 Russian coders (30 females and 4 males;
Mage = 23.81, SDage = 3.86) and 26 German/Austrian coders (19 females and 7 males;
Mage = 22.96, SDage = 3.88). All statements were translated in Russian and German
languages by bilingual graduated student, and then back-translated by a professional
translator. Coders assessed the answers provided by Russian and German participants (NRU = 41, NGER = 52) without knowing the origin of the statements. Coders
evaluated how abstract/concrete (from 1 “Absolutely abstract” to 5 “Absolutely
concrete”), self-relevant (from 1 “Not self-relevant” to 3 “Very self-relevant”), and
emotional (from 1 “Not emotional” to 5 “Very emotional”) the statements were.
Coders were instructed that the statements ought to be considered as abstract if they
described a general idea but no details that would specify that idea. The statements
ought to be considered as self-relevant if they were related to a person herself—i.e.,
were relevant to her and touched on her own life. Before evaluating the statements,
the coders read a detailed description of the three criteria (abstractness, self-relevance, and emotionality) and went through a training trial.
We employed three separate 2 (Origin of the coders: Russian vs. German/Austrian) × 2 (Origin of the statements: Russian vs. German) mixed effects ANOVAs.
Coders from both cultures assessed Russian statements as significantly more emotional (MRU = 3.25, SDRU = 0.54, MGER = 3.13, SDGER/AU = 0.49), F(1, 58) = 10.22,
p = .002, η2p = .15, and less self-relevant than German statements (MRU = 2.13,
SDRU = 0.24, MGER = 2.18, SDGER/AU = 0.26), F(1, 58) = 4.91, p = .031, η2p = .08.
Neither the coder origin main effect (pem = .768, psr = .641), nor the interaction
(pem = .315, psr = .244) was significant. No significant effects were found regarding
the statements’ abstractness.
Discussion
Study 2 revealed that compared to Russians, Germans reacted to Islamization threat
with decreased left frontal alpha asymmetry indicative of BIS activation, but only if
their need for tightness was high. Therefore, Study 2 showed that Germans reacted
more strongly to threat, but this effect depended on need for tightness. Interestingly,
need for tightness did not seem to influence defensive reactions in Russia. Thus,
Study 2 provides preliminary evidence that individuals’ need for tightness might
have an impact on threat-related responses and determine stronger BIS reactions in
certain cultures and to certain threats, namely to a broad societal threat that cannot
be regulated by existing social norms.
Additionally, Study 2 revealed noteworthy intercultural differences in how participants from Russia and Germany reasoned about growing Islamization. Russians
wrote about the topic in a more emotional way but considered it less self-relevant
than Germans. These findings correspond to previous research showing that Russians tend to reflect on their negative feelings and to keep more self-distance than

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

Westerners do (Grossmann and Kross 2010). Further, as in Study 1, we demonstrated that Russians reacted to threat with higher self-reported sadness than
Germans.

General discussion
In the present paper, we address the question how people with Russian and German
cultural backgrounds deal with societal threats they face in their daily lives. Specifically, we wanted to test whether defensive responses to threats based the activation
of BIS and BAS would be more pronounced in culturally tight Germany, as compared to culturally loose Russia. Additionally, we explored a possible impact of need
for tightness on responses to threats.
Two studies provide some evidence that Germans show stronger BIS-BAS as
reactions to threats than Russians. In Study 1, people from Germany reacted to the
violation of social norms with a stronger BAS activation than people from Russia.
As discussed above, this pattern of results might be due to the well-developed social
regulation typical for tight cultures, which helps people to approach and resolve
problems. These findings demonstrate that stronger motivational reactions to norm
violations might be another characteristic of tight societies.
In Study 2, we focused on reactions to a broader societal threat (growing Islamization of Europe). In this context, we did not observe significant differences between
Russia and Germany directly. However, our exploratory analysis revealed that cultural differences were moderated by need for tightness: Compared to Russians, Germans displayed stronger BIS activation to Islamization threat, if their need for tightness was high.
Together, our results suggest that tightness plays a direct role for motivated reactions to small-scale norm violations (Study 1) but not for a large-scale, collective
threats such as Islamization (Study 2). Speculating about some of the reasons for
this divergence, we emphasize that Islamization constitutes a broader and more
abstract threat than specific norm violation incidents. Although attitudes towards
immigration itself are connected to tightness (Harrington and Gelfand 2014), growing Islamization as a jeopardy to cultural norms and values can represent an existential threat that cannot be regulated by existing norms. In other words, tightness may
not be a relevant domain for an existential societal threat we tapped into in Study 2.
Interestingly, need for tightness selectively predicted right-frontal asymmetry
indicative of BIS activation in the context of Islamization (Study 2) in Germans.
This might be because in cultures where rules are usually present (i.e., Germany),
the absence of clear rules to rely on may be particularly aversive, especially among
individuals who desire them (i.e., have a high need for tightness).
To our knowledge, this is the first research that introduces the concept of need
for tightness and investigates its role in threat regulation processes. Importantly,
the weak correlation between need for tightness and perceived tightness indicates
that need for tightness is an independent factor, which is important to consider
in cross-cultural comparison. We demonstrate that need for tightness varies in
different countries. Interestingly, Russian participants scored lower on tightness

13

L. Prentice et al.

but higher on need for tightness, as compared to German participants. Moreover,
our results suggest that need for tightness is a moderating factor in threat contexts
that are devoid of clear norms and rules.
Our studies revealed that on average, Russians have a higher need for tightness than Germans. Assuming that high need for tightness in the face of Islamization would lead to greater BIS activation, we could expect Russians but not
Germans to be in BIS state while dealing with Islamization issue. However, we
could not show such reaction within the Russian sample. Although there are no
social norms that could downregulate Islamization threat either in Russia or in
Germany, the perception of that issue might be very different in the two cultures.
Islam in Russia has a long history, and at least since the Tatar-Mongolian invasion in the Middle Ages, parts of the Islamic culture has become part of Russian
mainstream culture (Malashenko and Nuritova 2009). For that reason, Russians
might perceive it not as an acute threat requiring immediate social changes like
in Germany, but as a continuous social phenomenon. Moreover, Russians live in
a society with a relatively recent history of dramatic political and economic shifts
and have higher anticipation of changes (Grossmann and Varnum 2011). For that
reason, in Russia, societal threats might be perceived as less critical compared to
the individual threats.
The two studies provided in this paper indicate that culturally tight (Germany)
and loose (Russia) societies indeed respond differently to some threatening stimuli.
One limitation is that these studies have relatively small samples, and the statistical tests conducted may suffer from low statistical power. The present studies were
conducted before statistical power became highly salient in psychological science
(Aarts et al. 2015). A high-power replication of the revealed effects should be one
of the next steps in further investigations. Another step may involve an exploration
which types of threat cause stronger defensiveness in tight societies. We focused on
societal threats here because the concept of tightness-looseness is based on social
norms. It is possible that cultural tightness reflects a sensitivity to norms in general,
rather than just social norms. Similar to how some other broad aspect of culture like
independence and interdependence associate with cognitive differences (analytical
and holistic thinking, respectively; Varnum et al. 2010), tight societies may also be
more sensitive to non-social norm violations (e.g., Proulx and Inzlicht 2012).
In the present paper, we show that Germans react to societal threats with stronger
BIS-BAS activation compared to Russians. It leads to the question how Russians
deal with threatening situations. In our studies, we showed that people from Russia reacted to threats with higher sadness than people from Germany. As mentioned
above, Russians tend to pay greater attention to negative experiences (e.g., Grossmann et al. 2012). Such focus on negative experiences, including sad ones, seems
to have positive implications for Russians and to help them to cope with problematic situations (Cote 1998). Furthermore, analysis of the open-ended questions in
Study 2 revealed that Russians are more self-distant than Germans. It is possible that
greater self-distance affords Russians to work through their negative experiences
in an emotionally adaptive fashion, promoting insight and closure (Grossmann and
Kross 2010). This speculation suggests an interesting avenue for future research on
culture-specific way to cope with societal threats.

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…

Conclusion
Nowadays, Russian and German societies engage in numerous business and political
interactions. To avoid possible misunderstandings during such interactions, one has
to consider significant psychological differences between the two cultures, including
culture-specific strategies of dealing with threat. The present paper shed some light
on the ways people from Russia and Germany approach social issues. Culturally tight
Germans showed higher BAS reaction to a threat that can be regulated by existing
norms, and higher BIS reaction to a broader societal threat, as compared to culturally
loose Russians. Russians, in turn, reacted to threatening situations with higher sadness. Our studies also highlight a conceptual and empirical difference between tightness and need for tightness, as well as the unique effects of the latter construct on regulation of societal threats. Altogether, the present research begins to demonstrate that
tightness, need for tightness, and unique features of a threat-inducing stimulus play
important roles for understanding how different cultures cope with societal threats.
These findings can help us to find the most optimal way to deal with threatening situations and eventually promote efficient cross-cultural communication.
Acknowledgements Open access funding provided by Austrian Science Fund (FWF).
Funding The present research was supported by the FWF Austrian Science Fund (Project P27457).
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creat​iveco​mmons​.org/licen​ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

Appendix 1
The affect scale used in Study 1
To what extent do these words reflect your emotional state in the moment of
described situation?
Absolutely not
1

Absolutely
2

3

4

5

Guilt
Aggression
Shame
Forgiveness
Need for punishment
Leniency
Sadness
Admiration
Anxiety

13

L. Prentice et al.
Absolutely not
1

Absolutely
2

3

4

5

Anger
Proud
Determination
Confusion
Nervousness
Weakness
Uncertainty
Courage
Satisfaction

Appendix 2
The need for tightness scale used in Study 1 and 2
Totally disagree
1

Totally agree
2

3

4

5

6

1. I think there should be many social norms that people are supposed to abide by in [the country]
2. I think people in [the country] should be punished, if they act in an inappropriate way
3. I think people in [the country] should be agree upon what behaviors are appropriate versus inappropriate in most situations
4. I think people in [the country] should always comply with social norms

References
Aarts, A. A., Anderson, J. E., Anderson, C. J., Attridge, P. R., Attwood, A., Axt, J., et al. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science, 349(6251). http://doi.org/10.1126/scien​
ce.aac47​16
Agroskin, D., Jonas, E., Klackl, J., & Prentice, M. (2016). Inhibition underlies the effect of high need for
closure on cultural closed-mindedness under mortality salience. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1–16.
Antalis Schweiz. (2015, December 17). The values of paper [Video file]. Retrieved from https​://www.
youtu​be.com/watch​?v=RBCVm​9AS0_I
Bizumic, B., Duckitt, J., Popadic, D., Dru, V., & Krauss, S. (2009). A cross-cultural investigation into
a reconceptualization of ethnocentrism. European Journal of Social Psychology, 39(6), 871–899.
Bodenhausen, G. V., Sheppard, L. A., & Kramer, G. P. (1994). Negative affect and social judgment: The
differential impact of anger and sadness. European Journal of Social Psychology, 24, 45–62.
Boll, T. (1998). Intentionalitätstheoretische Forschungsstrategie für moralische Emotionen. In B. Reichle
& M. Schmitt (Eds.), Verantwortung, Gerechtigkeit und Moral (pp. 173–187). Weinheim: Juventa.
Brockner, J., & Chen, Y.-R. (1996). The moderating roles of self-esteem and self-construal in reaction to
a threat to the self: Evidence from the People’s Republic of China and the United States. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 71(3), 603–615.
Burke, B. L., Martens, A., & Faucher, E. H. (2010). Two decades of terror management theory: A metaanalysis of mortality salience research. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 14(2), 155–195.

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…
Carver, C. S., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2009). Anger is an approach-related affect: Evidence and implications. Psychological Bulletin, 135(2), 183–204. https​://doi.org/10.1037/a0013​965.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behavioral approach, and affective responses
to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS Scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 319–333.
Chentsova-Dutton, Y. E. (2011). Culture and functions of emotions. In D. Lyusin & Y. E. ChentsovaDutton (Chairs), Psychology of emotions. Session conducted at the Annual International Vygotsky
Readings, Moscow, Russia.
Consedine, N. S., & Magai, C. (2002). The uncharted waters of emotion: Ethnicity, trait emotion and
emotion expression in older adults. Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology, 17, 71–100. https​://doi.
org/10.1023/A:10148​38920​556.
Corr, P. J., DeYoung, C. G., & McNaughton, N. (2013). Motivation and personality: A neuropsychological perspective. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 7(3), 158–175.
Cote, M. (1998). Russian psychology in transition: Interviews with Moscow psychologists. Hauppauge,
NY: Nova Science.
Drake, R. A., & Myers, L. R. (2006). Visual attention, emotion, and action tendency: Feeling active or
passive. Cognition and Emotion, 20(5), 608–622. https​://doi.org/10.1080/02699​93050​03681​05.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row Peterson.
Gelfand, M. J., Nishii, L. H., & Raver, J. L. (2006). On the nature and importance of cultural tightnesslooseness. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(6), 1225–1244.
Gelfand, M. J., Raver, J. L., Nishii, L., Leslie, L. M., Lun, J., Lim, B. C., et al. (2011). Differences
between tight and toose cultures: A 33-nation study. Science, 332(6033), 1100–1104.
Glicksohn, J., & Kinberg, Z. (2009). Performance on embedded figures tests: Profiling individual differences. Journal of Individual Differences, 30(3), 152–162.
Goldberg, L. R. (2001). Interpersonal personality item pool: A scientific collaboratory for the development of advanced measures of personality traits and other individual differences. Retrieved October
3, 2014, from http://ipip.ori.org/
Gray, J. A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the function of the septo-hippocampal system. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (2000). The neuropsychology of anxiety. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grossmann, I., Ellsworth, P. C., & Hong, Y. (2012). Culture, attention, and emotion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 141(1), 31–36.
Grossmann, I., & Kross, E. (2010). The impact of culture on adaptive versus maladaptive self-reflection.
Psychological Science, 21(8), 1150–1157.
Grossmann, I., & Na, J. (2014). Research in culture and psychology: Past lessons and future challenges.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 5(1), 1–14. https​://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1267.
Grossmann, I., & Varnum, M. E. W. (2011). Social class, culture, and cognition. Social Psychological
and Personality Science, 2(1), 81–89. https​://doi.org/10.1177/19485​50610​37711​9.
Halloway, S. D. (1999). Divergent cultural models of child rearing and pedagogy in Japanese preschools.
pdf. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 83, 61–75.
Harmon-Jones, E., Gable, P. A., & Peterson, C. K. (2010). The role of asymmetric frontal cortical activity
in emotion-related phenomena: A review and update. Biological Psychology, 84(3), 451–462.
Harrington, J. R., & Gelfand, M. J. (2014). Tightness-looseness across the 50 united states. Proceedings
of the National academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 2014(22), 1–6. https​://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.13179​37111​.
Hayes, A. F. (2016). The PROCESS macro for SPSS (Version 2.16) [Computer software]. Retrieved from
http://www.proce​ssmac​ro.org
Heine, S. J., Harihara, M., & Niiya, Y. (2002). Terror management in Japan. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 5(3), 187–196.
Holzer, S. (2000). School in Japan. AnimaniA, 34, 72–75.
Huddy, L., Feldman, S., Capelos, T., & Provost, C. (2016). The consequences of terrorism: Disentangling
the effects of personal and national threat. Political Psychology, 23(3), 485–509.
Ivanov, S., Sypchenko, L., & Webster, C. (2016). International sanctions and Russia’s hotel industry:
the impact on business and coping mechanisms of hoteliers. Tourism Planning & Development,
8316(September), 1–11.
Jack, A. (2015, September 4). The Islamic invasion of Europe [Video file; 2:38-5:17]. Retrieved from
https​://www.youtu​be.com/watch​?v=JQJRa​Jy-aFw

13

L. Prentice et al.
Jewell, G., & McCourt, M. E. (2000). Pseudoneglect: A review and meta-analysis of performance factors
in line bisection tasks. Neuropsychologia, 38(1), 93–110.
Jonas, E., McGregor, I., Klackl, J., Agroskin, D., Fritsche, I., Holbrook, C. et al. (2014). Threat and
defense: From anxiety to approach. In James M. Olson, Mark P. Zanna (Eds.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 219–286. http://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-80005​2-6.00004​-4
Kashima, E. S., & Hardie, E. (2000). The development and validation of the Relational, Individual, and
Collective Self-aspects (RIC) Scale. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 3, 19–48.
Khamatkhanova, M. (2015). Bezrabotitsa v Rossiiskoi Federatsii v usloviiakh ekonomicheskikh sanktsii: Prichiny, posledstviia, sposoby effektivnoi zaniatosto naseleniia [Unemployement in Russian
Federation under the conditions of economic sanctions: Causes, consequences, ways of effective
employment of population]. Fundamentalnye Issledovaniia, 11(4), 828–831.
Klackl, J., Agroskin, D., Mcgregor, I., & Jonas, E. (2017). Threat and defense produce opposite shifts in
relative hemispheric activation. Unpublished manuscript, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
Kühnen, U., Hannover, B., Roeder, U., Shah, A., Schubert, B., Upmeyer, A., & Zakaria, S. (2001). Crosscultural variations in identifying embedded figures. Comparisons from the United States, Germany,
Russia, and Malaysia. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 32(3), 366–372.
Lennox, R. D., & Wolfe, R. N. (1984). Revision of the self-monitoring scale. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 46(6), 1349–1364.
Lonsdorf, T. B., Weike, A. I., Nikamo, P., Schalling, M., Hamm, A. O., & Ohman, A. (2009). Genetic
gating of human fear learning and extinction. Psychological Science, 20(2), 198–206.
Malashenko, A., & Nuritova, A. (2009). Islam in Russia. Social Research, 76(1), Russia Today, 321–358.
Moscardino, U., Axia, G., Scrimin, S., & Capello, F. (2007). Narratives from caregivers of children surviving the terrorist attack in Beslan: Issues of health, culture, and resilience. Social Science and
Medicine, 64(8), 1776–1787.
Mrazek, A. J., Chiao, J. Y., Blizinsky, K. D., Lun, J., & Gelfand, M. J. (2013). The role of culture-gene
coevolution in morality judgment: Examining the interplay between tightness-looseness and allelic
variation of the serotonin transporter gene. Culture and Brain, 1, 100–117.
Mu, Y., Han, S., & Gelfand, M. J. (2017). The role of gamma interbrain synchrony in social coordination
when humans face territorial threats. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12(10), 1614–
1623. https​://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsx09​3.
Mu, Y., Kitayama, S., Han, S., & Gelfand, M. J. (2015). How culture gets embrained: Cultural differences
in event-related potentials of social norm violations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(50), 15348–15353. https​://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.15098​39112​.
Munafò, M. R., Clark, T., & Flint, J. (2005). Does measurement instrument moderate the association
between the serotonin transporter gene and anxiety-related personality traits? A meta-analysis.
Molecular Psychiatry, 10(4), 415–419.
Munafò, M. R., Durrant, C., Lewis, G., & Flint, J. (2009). Gene × environment interactions at the serotonin transporter locus. Biological Psychiatry, 65(3), 211–219.
Na, J., Grossmann, I., Varnum, M. E. W., Kitayama, S., Gonzalez, R., & Nisbett, R. E. (2010). Cultural differences are not always reducible to individual differences. Proceedings of the National
academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 107(14), 6192–6197. https​://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.10019​11107​.
Nash, K., McGregor, I., & Inzlicht, M. (2010). Line bisection as a neural marker of approach motivation.
Psychophysiology, 47(5), 979–983.
Naumov, A. I. (1996). Hofstede’s measurement of Russia: The influence of national cultures on business
management. Management, 1(3), 70–103.
Oldfield, R. C. (1971). The assessment and analysis of handedness: The Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia, 9(1), 97–113.
Peterson, R. A. (1994). A meta-analysis of Cronbach’s coefficient alpha. Journal of Consumer Research,
21, 381–391.
Prokhorova, L., Jonas, E., & Prentice, M. (2018). Injustice as a threat: Injustice arouses motivational discrepancies that drive passive avoidance and anxiety. Unpublished manuscript, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
Proulx, T., & Inzlicht, M. (2012). The five “A”s of meaning maintenance: Finding meaning in the theories of sense-making. Psychological Inquiry, 23(4), 317–335. https​://doi.org/10.1080/10478​
40X.2012.70237​2.
Proulx, T., Inzlicht, M., & Harmon-jones, E. (2012). Understanding all inconsistency compensation as a
palliative response to violated expectations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(5), 285–291.

13

Reaction to norm transgressions and Islamization threat in…
Sallivan, J., & Nonaka, I. (1988). Culture and strategic issue categorization theory. Management International Review, 28(3), 6–10.
Schmitt, M., Baumert, A., Fetchenhauer, D., Gollwitzer, M., Rothmund, T., & Schlösser, T.
(2009). Sensibilität für Ungerechtigkeit. Psychologische Rundschau, 60(1), 8–22. https​://doi.
org/10.1026/0033-3042.60.1.8.
Schneider, S. C., & De Meyer, A. (1991). Interpreting and responding to strategic issues: The impact of
national culture. Strategic Management Journal, 12(4), 307–320.
Steindl, C., Jonas, E., Klackl, J., Hekele, F., & Sittenthaler, S. (2016). The approach-motivational nature
of reactance—Evidence from asymmetrical frontal cortical activation. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria.
Sussman, L., & Karlekar, K. D. (2002). The annual survey of press freedom 2002. New York: Freedom
House.
Tam, K. P., Chiu, C. Y., & Lau, I. Y. M. (2007). Terror management among Chinese: Worldview defence
and intergroup bias in resource allocation. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 10(2), 93–102.
Thompson, M. M., Naccarato, M. E., & Parker, K. H. (1992). Measuring cognitive needs: The development and validation of the Personal Need for Structure (PNS) and Personal Fear of Invalidity (PFI)
measures. Unpublished manuscript, University of Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
Varnum, M. E. W., Grossmann, I., Kitayama, S., & Nisbett, R. E. (2010). The origin of cultural differences in cognition: The social orientation hypothesis. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
19(1), 9–13. https​://doi.org/10.1177/09637​21409​35930​1.
Wang, W. (2015). Impact of Western sanctions on Russia in the Ukraine crisis. Journal of Politics and
Law, 8(2), 1–6.
Yang, L. H., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Kotabe, H., Link, B. G., Saw, A., Wong, G., et al. (2013). Culture,
threat, and mental illness stigma: Identifying culture-specific threat among Chinese-American
groups. Social Science and Medicine, 88, 56–67.
Zou, X., Tam, K. P., Morris, M. W., Lee, S. L., Lau, I. Y. M., & Chiu, C.-Y. (2009). Culture as common
sense: Perceived consensus versus personal beliefs as mechanisms of cultural influence. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 97(4), 579–597. https​://doi.org/10.1037/a0016​399.

Affiliations
Liza Prentice1 · Johannes Klackl1 · Dmitrij Agroskin1 · Igor Grossmann2 ·
Yuri Alexandrov3,4 · Vladimir Apanovich3 · Boris Bezdenezhnykh3 · Eva Jonas1
Johannes Klackl
johannes.klackl@sbg.ac.at
Dmitrij Agroskin
dagroskin@web.de
Igor Grossmann
igrossma@uwaterloo.ca
Yuri Alexandrov
yuraalexandrov@yandex.ru
Vladimir Apanovich
apanovitschvv@yandex.ru
Boris Bezdenezhnykh
bezbornik@mail.ru
Eva Jonas
eva.jonas@sbg.ac.at

13

L. Prentice et al.
1

Department of Psychology, Social Psychology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Str. 34,
5020 Salzburg, Austria

2

Department of Psychology, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo,
ON N2L 3G1, Canada

3

Laboratory of Neural Bases of Mind, Institute of Psychology, Russian Academy of Sciences,
Yaroslavskaya Str. 13, Moscow, Russia 129366

4

Department of Psychology, National Research University Higher School of Economics, 20
Myasnitskaya Ulitsa, Moscow, Russia 101000

13

