Emotion Review
http://emr.sagepub.com/

Emotional Behaviors, Emotivational Goals, Emotion Strategies: Multiple Levels of Organization
Integrate Variable and Consistent Responses
Ira J. Roseman
Emotion Review 2011 3: 434
DOI: 10.1177/1754073911410744
The online version of this article can be found at:
http://emr.sagepub.com/content/3/4/434

Published by:
http://www.sagepublications.com

On behalf of:

International Society for Research on Emotion

Additional services and information for Emotion Review can be found at:
Email Alerts: http://emr.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts
Subscriptions: http://emr.sagepub.com/subscriptions
Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav
Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
Citations: http://emr.sagepub.com/content/3/4/434.refs.html

>> Version of Record - Sep 20, 2011
What is This?

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

Emotional Behaviors, Emotivational Goals, Emotion
Strategies: Multiple Levels of Organization
Integrate Variable and Consistent Responses

Emotion Review
Vol. 3, No. 4 (October 2011) 434–443
© The Author(s) 2011
ISSN 1754-0739
DOI: 10.1177/1754073911410744
er.sagepub.com

Ira J. Roseman

Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, USA

Abstract
Researchers have found undeniable variability and irrefutable evidence of consistencies in emotional responses across situations,
individuals, and cultures. Both must be acknowledged in constructing adequate, enduring models of emotional phenomena. In this
article I outline an empirically-grounded model of the structure of the emotion system, in which relatively variable actions may
be used to pursue relatively consistent goals within discrete emotion syndromes; the syndromes form a stable, coherent set of
strategies for coping with crises and opportunities. I also discuss a framework that can integrate dimensional and discrete perspectives
on emotions.

Keywords
action tendencies, discrete emotions, emotion strategies, emotivational goals

Recently emotion researchers have been passionately engaged
in what Barrett, Lindquist, and Gendron (2007) termed “The
Great Emotions Debate.” On one side is the basic emotion
paradigm (claiming that emotions such as joy, sadness, fear, and
anger are biologically and/or psychologically primitive) or discrete emotion paradigm (claiming that such emotions differ
from each other in kind, rather than just in degree) (see, e.g.,
Ekman, 1992, 2003; Izard, 1977, 2007; Panksepp, 1998;
Tomkins, 1962, 1963). It has been challenged by a dimensional
or componential perspective, championed especially by Russell
and Barrett (e.g., Barrett, 2006, 2009; Russell, 2003; Russell &
Barrett, 1999), claiming that there is a simpler underlying structure of affective space.
Battle lines have been drawn around the issue of variability
across instances of particular emotions. For example, in arguing
that terms such as fear and anger are “folk concepts” rather than
empirically based scientific constructs, Russell (2003) cites
heterogeneity across instances of a hypothetical individual’s
fear, asking “What, other than the label fear, do various instances
of fear share with each other that they do not share with what is
not fear?” (p. 146).
Similarly, Barrett (2009) argues that emotions are not natural
kinds capturing empirical regularities:

. . . not all mental states belonging to a particular category named by an
emotion word such as ‘‘fear’’ look alike, feel alike, or have the same
neurophysiological signature from one instance to another. For example, when another driver cuts you up in traffic, you might shout as you
slam on the breaks. When your child picks up a sharp knife, you might
calmly take it from her or ask her to put it down. When you hear a news
report about a bombing or a hurricane, you might turn up the radio.
When a colleague criticises you in front of a group, you might sit very
still and perhaps even nod your head and smile. You may tease a friend
who threatens your view of yourself, and so on [. . .] while there may
be some statistical regularity across instances that people name using
the same emotion word (although this has yet to be convincingly measured in a scientific sense over and above simple affective properties like
valence [. . .]), the differences within a category outweigh the similarities.
(pp. 1285–1288)

Instead of basic emotions, the “core affect” dimensions of
valence and arousal (Russell, 2003) are held to be psychologically and biologically basic, constituting the fundamental axes
of emotion space.
It is worth noting that many if not all the arguments in the
current great debate, including the emphasis on variability, have
been heard before (see, e.g., Ekman, 1973; Gendron & Barrett,
2009). The basic emotion perspective was advanced by Darwin
(1872), who described patterns of facial, postural, and vocal

Author note: I am grateful to Nico Frijda, Marc Lewis, Carroll Izard, and an anonymous reviewer for helpful comments.
Corresponding author: Ira Roseman, Department of Psychology, Rutgers University, 311 N. Fifth Street, Camden, NJ 08102, USA. Email: roseman@crab.rutgers.edu

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

Roseman

responses corresponding to various emotions, and assembled
often anecdotal evidence of their universality and evolutionary
continuity across species. Behaviorists objected to Darwin’s
nativism, and produced evidence of variability, wherein the
same stimulus elicited different emotion expressions in different research participants, and different observers gave different
emotion labels to the same facial display (e.g., Landis, 1924).
Tomkins (e.g., 1962) reasserted Darwin’s view, guiding Ekman
and Izard toward good exemplars of emotion-specific facial
displays that would be consistently reproduced and accurately
categorized in research across individuals and cultures (e.g.,
Ekman, Sorenson, & Friesen, 1969; Izard, 1971). It was these
empirically observed consistencies in facial responses that led
to a paradigm shift and the era of discrete emotion dominance
over the dimensional view (whose essential elements, including
the specific dimensions of pleasantness and arousal, had been
delineated by Wundt [1893]).
Often in great debates, especially recurrent ones, there is
merit on both sides. In my view, an unbiased reading of the
literature finds undeniable evidence of variability in the
response profiles of particular emotions, and also irrefutable
evidence of consistency across many instances of the same
emotion. Let us review some of this evidence and consider how
a model of emotions might integrate both variability and
­consistency in responses.

Evidence of Variability in Responses across
Instances of Particular Emotions
Like the hypothetical examples given by Russell (2003) and
Barrett (2009), data from recalled experiences of actual emotions
(e.g., Roseman, Swartz, Newman, & Nichols, 2010; Roseman,
Wiest, & Swartz, 1994) show variation in emotional behavior.1
For example, when feeling anger: participant C1 made hostile
comments, slammed a car door, and “bitched” to a friend; T19
screamed at and hit her son; and T39 screamed, curled up on the
floor, and “cried [her] anger out.” When feeling joy: L7 went to
class, went for a run, and made a phone call; L12 smiled,
screamed, jumped up in the air, thanked the person who told her
of her college admission, and went for a bike ride; and T58 found
a companion with whom he drank champagne. Similar variability is shown in actions taken when feeling other emotions.
Indeed, many studies show variation across situations,
among individuals, or over time in responses thought to be
characteristic of particular emotions. For example, Blanchard
and Blanchard (2005) describe how features of the physical and
social situation (e.g., the imminence of a threat, the availability
of shelter or an avenue of escape, the dominance status of conspecifics present in the situation) influence whether rats freeze,
hide, flee, fight, or produce alarm vocalizations when faced
with a threat stimulus. Fridlund (1991) found that people
watching pleasant videotapes smile more when watching with a
friend, or when told a friend is watching elsewhere, than equally
happy people watching alone.
In addition, correlations among responses thought to be
characteristic of the same emotion are sometimes low. For

Emotional Behaviors, Goals, Strategies   435

example, Lang (1988) reported relatively low correlations among
self-reported fear, measures of sympathetic arousal such as
sweating, and behavioral avoidance in studies of people
­confronting feared stimuli.

Five Explanations for Variability in Emotional
Responses across Instances
There are at least five reasons why the kind of variability just
cited is to be expected. I will discuss each one in turn.
The occurrence of multiple emotions in response to the
same event. In our studies (e.g., Roseman et al., 1994, 2010),
though asked to recall a time when they felt a particular emotion (e.g., intense anger), many participants also reported feeling other emotion(s) (e.g., fear, sadness) with equal or greater
intensity. This is consistent with findings of other investigators
(e.g., Oatley & Johnson-Laird, 2011). It also helps explain some
of the variability seen in our data, and in critiques of the discrete
emotion view.
For example, one likely reason why participant T39 in
Roseman et al. (1994) cried as well as screamed when feeling
anger is that she had just learned how her brother had been
murdered, and (according to self-ratings) was also feeling
sadness (along with other emotions, such as distress and
affection). In an example given by Barrett (2009), when cut
off by another driver we might both shout and slam on the
breaks. This may reflect feeling both anger and fear. Whether
multiple emotions are experienced simultaneously or in quick
succession, they may add to or change responses observed in
single-emotion instances.
Multiple and variable patterns of action readiness
potentiated in a particular emotion. One difference
between the concept of an action tendency, used here in the
sense of “a predisposition to think, act, behave, or proceed in a
particular way” (American Heritage Dictionary of the English
Language, 2006), and action readiness (e.g., proposed by Frijda,
1986), is that the former might be an impulse to a particular
action (such as yelling, freezing, or jumping up and down)
occurring relatively independently from one’s circumstances,
while the latter suggests differential responsiveness to stimuli.
In the readiness conception, a particular emotion (e.g., anger)
might involve increased readiness to take different actions (e.g.,
yelling at vs. hitting someone), depending on situational variables (e.g., the target’s relative power and relationship to the
angry person) or individual difference factors (e.g., predisposition to verbal vs. physical aggression). In Roseman et al.
(1994), participant C1 made hostile comments to her brother,
whereas T39 screamed and hit her son.
But the problem of action variability goes deeper. Most
action tendencies hypothesized to be characteristic of emotions
(e.g., hitting in anger, running away in fear, hiding in shame) are
not fixed action patterns, but complex and flexible action programs “that allow for variations in circumstances and for feedback from actions executed” (Frijda, 1986, p. 83). Lazarus

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

436  Emotion Review Vol. 3 No. 4

(1991, pp. 194–203) cited the reproductive cycle of the ring
dove—in which species-typical behavior patterns such as courting, copulation, nest building, and feeding of the young vary
according to a complex interplay of external stimulus conditions
(e.g., availability of nesting materials, the sight and behavior of
the mate) and internal determinants (e.g., hormonal levels)—as
shedding light on how biologically based action tendencies of
emotions might be organized. How to hit in anger, where to run
in fear or hide in shame varies depending on stimulus conditions. So does defensive aggression and even freezing in rats’
fear behavior (Godsil, Tinsley, & Fanselow, 2003).
Accepting the existence of multiple and complex patterns of
action readiness acknowledges a central argument made by
critics of basic emotions. Insofar as there are different action
readinesses and/or flexible action tendencies linked to the
same emotion, there will be differing patterns of peripheral,
autonomic, and at least lower level central nervous system
substrates for these responses.
However, Barrett’s (2009) conclusion that this shows the
arbitrariness or uselessness of fear as a category or as a basic
emotion is unwarranted. A contingent relationship between an
emotion and a behavioral or physiological response is very different from an absence of relationship. Well-respected, widely
held scientific theories often predict interactions among variables, as well as or instead of main effects (e.g., Fishbein &
Ajzen, 1975; Mischel, 2004). Knowing that a fearful animal is
more likely to either freeze, fight defensively, or flee—depending
on the imminence of the danger and the availability of an escape
route—is systematic understanding of emotion–behavior relationships under specifiable conditions. Knowing that a person
will be more inclined to either yell or hit—depending on the
target’s power and relationship to the actor—when feeling anger
than when feeling no emotion or other emotions such as sadness,
fear, or shame, represents significant predictive capacity.
Modulation of emotional responses by emotion regulation.
As research has shown, human emotions are regulated at least
to some extent from early childhood (e.g., Cole, Martin, &
Dennis, 2004). Insofar as regulatory processes are often operative, modulate emotional responses, and differ among individuals and over time (see, e.g., John & Gross, 2004), they may
account for significant variability. For example, in Roseman
et al. (1994), participant T43 was afraid, but went home to face
a beating from his father to “get the fear over with.” In one of
Barrett’s (2009) examples, a person is criticized by a colleague,
but nods and smiles—as one might do to conceal fear or anxiety
during a conference presentation.
Aware of the possibility of emotion regulation, Roseman
et al. (1994) asked participants not only what they did when
feeling a particular emotion, but also what they felt like doing.
T43, while going home to face a beating, said he felt like running away (all participants recalling instances of fear reported
feeling at least somewhat like running away, and this action
tendency was rated higher in fear than in other negative emotions). Here differences between what people felt like doing and
what they did may reflect the influence of emotion regulation

modifying a characteristic emotional response. Ekman (1972)
accounted for emotion expression variability by maintaining
that people can intensify, deintensify, or mask expressions of
felt emotions to conform to cultural display rules.
Other motivational, cognitive, and situational determinants
of emotional and nonemotional responses. Processes other
than emotion regulation can also influence both emotional and
nonemotional behavior occurring during an emotion episode.
For example, in Roseman et al. (2010), participant T63, who felt
affection, lay down on a friend’s lap in part because she was also
feeling tired (motivated by fatigue). T62, who felt proud that she
spoke up when encountering discrimination, felt like indulging
by eating a brownie sundae (perhaps following a cognitive norm
permitting self-reward after an accomplishment). If our child
picks up a sharp knife we may calmly ask her to put it down
(Barrett, 2009) because, in our situation, she’s not yet close to
injuring herself.
The effects of these variables on responses when feeling an
emotion do not demonstrate that the emotion lacks a coherent
response profile; they merely show that responses at any given
time can have more than one determinant. For example, physical activity, eating, and sleep deprivation can alter physiological
responses that are also affected in emotion (such as heart rate,
cortisol secretion, and serotonin levels), which may decrease
coherence among responses characteristic of an emotion.
Camras and Fatani (2008) discuss how head position and gaze
direction can influence brow and eye movements that are coded
as emotion action units; such influences can occur during
­emotional reactions.
The impact of the intensity of emotions and nonemotional
processes. According to a number of theorists (e.g., Frijda,
2007; Plutchik, 1980), the degree of correspondence between
an emotion and its characteristic responses is at least in part a
function of the emotion’s intensity (and, presumably, the intensity of any nonemotional influences, including competing motivational processes such as emotion regulation, or situational
variables such as the presence of other people). For example, in
Roseman et al. (2010), feeling less than intense affection (love),
participant T52 had no physical sensations, expressed affection
verbally, and wanted nothing. Experiencing very intense affection, L3 felt numerous sensations, made lots of physical contact, and wanted equally intense affection returned.

A Model of Discrete Emotions in the Emotion
System
To provide the context needed for understanding the discussion
to follow on consistencies in responses characteristic of particular emotions, I will briefly outline the model of the emotion
system on which that discussion will be based (updating
Roseman, 2001, 2008, drawing on research findings from our
laboratory and those of other investigators). In this model, emotions are conceptualized as syndromes (Averill, 1980) of five
response types. The phenomenological component of an

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

Roseman

emotion includes its characteristic thoughts and feelings. For
example, in anger, there are often thoughts about injustice
(Averill, 1982), and a feeling of being ready to explode (Davitz,
1969). The physiological component includes central and
peripheral patterns of neural, chemical, and muscular responses.
In anger, these might include activity in the medial and basal
amygdala and portions of cingulate motor areas 23 and 24
(Potegal & Stemmler, 2010), elevated levels of noradrenaline,
and large increases in heart rate and diastolic blood pressure
(Stemmler, 2010). The expressive component encompasses facial,
vocal, and postural changes, such as in anger, lowered brows
and squarish mouth (see Ekman, 2003); loud, fast, vocalizations
increasing in pitch (Green, Whitney, & Gustafson, 2010); and
chest bent forward with head relatively erect (Coulson, 2004).
The behavioral component consists of tendencies or readinesses
to take particular actions, such as hitting (Potegal & Qiu, 2010).
The emotivational component of an emotion consists of goals
that people want to pursue when the emotion is experienced
(Roseman, 1984; cf. De Rivera, 1977; Frijda, 1986), for example,
in anger, to get revenge (Aristotle, 1954).
Examination of emotion syndromes like the one for anger
suggests that the various responses characteristic of a particular
emotion are interrelated and form a strategy for coping with a
particular type of situation (cf. Lazarus, 1991). Such coping
strategies have been shaped by evolution (like reproductive strategies) and need not be consciously implemented by the person
feeling the emotion, but organize sets of emotion responses.
Within an emotion syndrome, each response component has a
functional role to play in implementing the emotion’s strategy.
For example, the strategy of anger involves moving against
another person, to induce or force a change in the target’s
behavior. The emotivational component of the emotion provides
a goal that motivates and directs instrumental action to be
­consistent with the emotion’s strategy. For example, the goal of
vengeance motivates behaviors aiming to create negative
­consequences for the target of one’s anger.
The behavioral component suggests particular actions that
evolution or experience has indicated may successfully implement the emotion’s strategy. For example, in anger, hitting is an
action that might succeed in inducing other people to change
their behavior.
The expressive component provides communications that
can lead perceivers to act in ways that fit with the emotion’s
strategy. Anger’s facial, vocal, and postural responses function
as threat displays, communicating hostile intent that may deter
unwanted actions by perceivers.
The phenomenological component represents important
aspects of a situation to consciousness, and cues retrieval of
other experiences of the emotion and associated information.
For example, prototypical thoughts in anger focus attention on
injustices or harms caused by the target, and ways of halting or
avenging them. Feeling ready to explode and labeling one’s
state as anger connect present instances to prior anger experiences, increasing access to information about responses that
have or have not been effective in similar situations, and helping
to guide goal-directed action.

Emotional Behaviors, Goals, Strategies   437

Finally, the physiological component organizes and provides
the physical substrate for responses within an emotion’s strategy.
In anger, patterned activity in the amygdala and cingulate cortex
may motivate harm-doing and organize aggressive action; increa­
ses in respiration and blood pressure increase energy for attack;
facial muscle movements and flushing help express and communicate the emotion; and physiological feedback from such processes to the cortex contributes to the emotion’s phenomenology.
Some observed and hypothesized phenomenological, expressive, behavioral, and emotivational responses for different emotions are shown in the boxes of Figure 1. Strategies integrating
the responses for each emotion are shown in angle brackets at
the bottom of each box. Proceeding outward from an emotion
box to its borders around the chart shows the combinations of
appraisals proposed to elicit that emotion (see Roseman, 2001,
for additional detail).
The strategies of different emotions shown in Figure 1 are
related, and include four contrasting emotion families. (Surprise,
whose status as an emotion is controversial, has a unique pattern.) Within each family are emotions with similar yet distinct
strategies that have evolved to cope either with motive-relevant
events in general (cf. Weiner, 1985, on attribution-independent
emotions), events appraised as caused by other people, or events
caused by the self. The five positive emotions make up a family
of contacting emotions, which increase proximity to and/or
interaction with impersonal, interpersonal, or intrapersonal
stimuli. Distress, sadness, fear, interpersonal dislike, and regret
make up a family of distancing emotions, which increase distance from stimuli, thus reducing contact and/or interaction with
them. Disgust, contempt, and shame comprise a family of rejection emotions. Unlike the distancing emotions, which get the
self away from something, rejection emotions move something
away from the self. Frustration, anger, and guilt comprise a family of attack emotions, which function to move against objects
and events in general, against other persons, or against the self.
Together with the appraisal patterns that elicit them, the set
of emotions in Figure 1 form an organized emotion system. The
strategies of these emotions provide a coherent set of ways for
coping with the general types of crises and opportunities that
human beings may face when pursuing any motive (hunger, sex,
achievement, etc.). That is, these strategies involve moving,
preparing to move, suspending movement, or ceasing movement; moving toward, moving away, moving something else
away, or moving against something; and moving with reference
to objects and events, other persons, or the self. Respectively
these function to cope with crises and opportunities that are at
hand, imminent, evolving, or over; in which the best that one
could do is to maximize, minimize, eliminate, or change
­something; about the world, other persons, or the self.

Evidence of Consistency in Responses across
Instances of Particular Emotions
Consistency in Strategy
Despite the variability reviewed earlier, there is also consistency
across instances of particular emotions. The greatest consistency

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

438  Emotion Review Vol. 3 No. 4

•

•

•

•

Figure 1. Hypothesized structure of the emotion system, showing appraisals and some resulting emotional responses.

Note: Emotion components: PHE = phenomenological; EXP = expressive; BEH = behavioral; EMV = emotivational goal. Strategies integrating the response components for
each emotion are given in angle brackets. Appraisal combinations eliciting each emotion are shown around the borders of the chart.

may be found in their strategies. For example, many varied
responses in anger function to move against another person (or
stimuli regarded like another person) in ways specialized for
dealing with sentient, goal-pursuing human beings—such as

yelling, hitting, criticizing, thwarting, and so forth. Responses
in joy function to move toward something, for example, by
moving exuberantly (increasing contact with external stimuli),
pursuing consummatory stimuli (e.g., food, sexual stimulation),

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

Roseman

attempting instrumental action (approaching goals and incentives), or enhancing interaction (e.g., by smiling, talking, or
otherwise increasing social contact). Responses in sadness function to stop moving toward something, for example, by diminished movement, decreased consummatory and instrumental
behavior, and reduced socializing. Responses in fear function to
prepare to move away from or to stop moving toward some
danger, for example, by vigilance, freezing, calling for help,
preparing for flight, or defensive aggression (distinguished from
offensive “hostile” aggression by its tendency to be terminated
when escape becomes possible; cf. Potegal & Stemmler, 2010).
Slamming on the brakes when cut off while driving, turning up
the radio to hear news about a hurricane, and various other fear
behaviors cited by Barrett (2009) and Russell (2003) have a
similar avoidance strategy in common.
This perspective was pioneered by Frijda (1986), and is
maintained by Frijda and Parrott (2011) in identifying different
ur-emotions with different modes of action readiness, such as
antagonism, affiliation, and submission. Similar conceptions of
emotions as functionally defined classes of behavior have been
articulated by Lazarus (1991, p. 202), Lewis and Liu (2011),
and Oatley and Johnson-Laird (2011).

Consistency in Emotivational Goals
In contrast to the view of emotional behavior as merely impulsive,
I have proposed that under some conditions it is goal-directed,
with instrumental actions aiming toward emotion-specific emotivational goals (e.g., Roseman, 2008). Research has supported
a number of emotivational goals shown for particular emotions
in Figure 1. For example, across wide ranges of recalled emotion instances, participants differentially wanted to “get to a safe
place” when feeling fear, “get back at someone” when feeling
anger, and “overcome some obstacle” when feeling frustration
(Roseman et al., 1994). Participants differentially wanted to
“make the experience last longer” when feeling joy, “be close to
someone” when feeling affection, “seek recognition” when feeling pride, and “figure out what’s going on” when feeling surprise (Roseman et al., 2010). Other researchers have also found
consistencies in emotivational goals across instances (e.g.,
Zeelenberg, van Dijk, Manstead, & van der Pligt, 1998).
Emotivational goals can explain what a wide variety of
behaviors undertaken when feeling a particular emotion have in
common. For example, when feeling angry one might, among
other actions, yell at someone (Potegal & Qiu, 2010) or refuse
to speak to the person (Williams, 2001). These behaviors share
few if any surface features, and thus will also differ in at least
some of the physiology that enacts them and the feelings
accompanying the behaviors and physiological changes. But
they may serve the same goal: getting revenge (hurting in some
way, e.g., by causing the target to feel unpleasant emotions).
In Russell’s (2003) examples, freezing when afraid of falling, squishing a feared spider, speeding to the airport when
afraid of missing one’s flight, buying bonds when afraid of falling stock prices, and phoning the doctor when afraid one’s
child is ill have in common the goal of avoiding danger.

Emotional Behaviors, Goals, Strategies   439

Without acknowledging this emotivational goal, it would be
difficult to explain other actions that also might be taken, such
as jumping back if one failed to squish the spider; suspending
investment activity if bonds were also risky; and rushing one’s
child to the emergency room or praying if one failed to reach a
doctor on the phone.

Consistency in Action Readiness
There are also regularities in readiness for particular emotional
behaviors, like those in Figure 1 (cf. Frijda & Parrott, 2011, on
species-specific “primary actions” for each hypothesized
ur-emotion). For example, although other hypothesized action
tendencies were not supported, Roseman et al. (1994) found that
across many recalled instances, participants differentially felt
like running away when feeling fear, yelling when feeling
anger, and “doing nothing” when feeling sadness (as shown in
Figure 1, the hypothesized action tendency for sadness is inaction). In Roseman et al. (2010), participants differentially felt
like jumping up and down when feeling joy, holding someone
when feeling affection, and “showing what you can do” when
feeling pride (hypothesized action tendencies for pride are to
exhibit and assert the self). Significant consistencies in action
tendencies across many instances of an emotion have also been
reported by other researchers (e.g., Frijda, Kuipers, & ter
Schure, 1989; Shaver, Schwartz, Kirson, & O’Connor, 1987).
Action readinesses may or may not be enacted, and may be
variably enacted in given instances of emotions (due to emotion
regulation or other factors, as described above). Emotion-typical
behaviors may also be produced by nonemotional processes (as
in instrumental aggression). But we may expect an emotion’s
characteristic actions to increase in likelihood when a person
feels the emotion (compared to the same person unemotional in
the same situation), and to occur more often when feeling that
emotion than when feeling other emotions. For example,
research participants reported differentially saying something
nasty when feeling anger, celebrating when feeling joy, embracing someone when feeling affection, and holding their heads up
high and asserting themselves when feeling pride (other hypotheses about actions actually performed were not supported; see
Roseman et al., 1994, 2010, for details).

Dual Organization of Emotional Behavior by
Emotivational Goals and Action
Readiness. Though human emotional behavior is sometimes directed toward achieving emotivational goals, it is at
other times not goal-directed, and may even be “blind” (Tolman,
1923), heedless of consequences, or seemingly irrational. When
will each type of behavior occur?
One possibility (Roseman, 2008) is that when appraisal
indicates a significant but relatively small or slow change in
fulfillment of a motive (hunger, competence motivation, etc.),
relatively low-intensity emotions are produced, engendering
goal-directed emotional behavior (i.e., emotional behavior primarily organized by emotivational goals). For example, feeling

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

440  Emotion Review Vol. 3 No. 4

less than very intense fear, participant T6 in Roseman et al.
(1994) tried to talk her way out of “looking bad.” But as the
amount or speed of motive-relevant change increases, emotion
intensity may increase, and the influence of emotion on behavior may be qualitatively different: goal-directedness may diminish, and behavior may become increasingly constrained toward
the characteristic action patterns of the emotion (increasingly
organized by action tendencies and readinesses). If T6 were
terrified, she might be preoccupied with watching for occurrence of the danger, find it harder to speak coherently, and feel
compelled to flee from the situation. In one of Barrett’s (2009)
examples, you tease a friend who threatens your view of yourself. But if you felt intensely frightened by this threat, teasing
might well be more difficult to do. Instead you might react more
like participant T43, whose fear was manifest in a dry mouth
and shaking voice. Consistent with this hypothesis, Frijda,
Ortony, Sonnemans, and Clore (1992) found that felt emotion
intensity correlated with the perceived “drasticness” of actions
taken (see also Frijda, 2007). According to a review by Potegal
(2010), increases in anger intensity are associated with increasing
likelihood of aggressive action.
It may be evolutionarily advantageous to have emotional
behavior organized under some conditions primarily by emotivational goals, and under other conditions primarily by action
readinesses. If low-intensity emotions occur when motiverelevant change is relatively small or slow, these conditions
may allow time to calculate consequences and select the behavior (e.g., from among alternatives suggested by situational features, prior experiences, cultural scripts, or deliberative thought,
as well as by an emotion’s action readinesses) that seems most
likely to achieve an emotivational goal (e.g., how to get to connect with a particular person when feeling anger, or connect
with a particular person when feeling love) in a specific situation. In contrast, if high-intensity emotions are produced by
very large or rapid motive-relevant changes, fast action may be
required (see, e.g., Cannon, 1932; LeDoux, 1996) to successfully deal with the crisis or seize the opportunity. Under those
conditions, deliberating about how to attain an emotivational
goal may be too costly; it may be better to have one or more
time-tested default coping behavior patterns (such as freezing in
fear, yelling in anger, or embracing someone in love) that can
be quickly initiated.
This dual-organization hypothesis may help integrate findings of emotional behavior variability (from flexible behaviors
relatively deliberatively selected to attain emotivational goals)
and consistency (from more automatic species-typical patterns
of action readiness). That is, emotion intensity may be an
important determinant of the degree of consistency observed
across instances of an emotion: more consistency may be
observed in higher intensity instances.
However, alternative conceptualizations of emotional behavior organization are also plausible. As emotion intensity
increases, the intensity with which people want to attain an
emotivational goal (e.g., getting revenge in anger, connecting
with a particular person when feeling love) might increase as
much or more as the felt compulsion to act in a particular way

(e.g., yelling, embracing), prompting a wider search for behaviors to attain the goal. It is also possible that, at extremely high
emotion intensity, behavior becomes disorganized (cf. Young,
1949). Research is needed to test whether increasing emotion
intensity shifts behavior from organization by emotivational
goals toward organization by action readiness.

Consistency in Emotion Expression
Facial expression is an imperfect indicator of emotion. For
example, infants who appear afraid when facing a visual cliff
and adults who report feeling surprised by unexpected events
often do not show facial expressions of those emotions (Hiatt,
Campos, & Emde, 1979; Reisenzein, Bördgen, Holtbernd, &
Matz, 2006). But although people can feel an emotion without
expressing it, or simulate an expression without feeling the
emotion, evidence of significant emotion–expression consistencies remains striking. Critiques of basic emotions simply fail to
explain why, for example, similar facial and vocal responses
(e.g., smiling and laughter in happiness, downturned lips and
crying in sadness) would be associated with similar emotion
concepts at far beyond chance frequencies across cultures (see,
e.g., Ekman, 1994); or how those expressions could exist in
people unable to learn them from seeing or hearing instances,
as in children born blind and deaf (see, e.g., Collier, 1985;
Galati, Miceli, & Sini, 2001; Matsumoto & Willingham, 2009).
Indeed, evidence of emotion-specific expressive patterns is
mounting. Since Ekman et al.’s initial (1969) findings, researchers have found cross-culturally recognizable expressions for
contempt (e.g., Izard & Haynes, 1988; Matsumoto & Ekman,
2004) and pride (e.g., Tracy & Robins, 2008), and some evidence for distinct expressive patterns for other emotions such as
embarrassment and love (see, e.g., Keltner, Ekman, Gonzaga, &
Beer, 2003).
Once we acknowledge that, like most phenomena in science,
there is a beyond-chance probabilistic (rather than necessary)
relationship between particular emotions and particular
expressions—a relationship that, as noted earlier, may be altered
by such factors as emotion intensity, emotion regulation, and
situational determinants (such as the presence of an audience, as
found by Fridlund, 1991)—emotion scientists can balance
awareness of the limits of emotion–expression correspondences
with appreciation of empirically observed consistencies.

Consistency in Phenomenology
Researchers have found significant consistencies in the phenomenology of particular emotions. For example, Scherer and
Wallbott (1994) reported that, across 37 countries on five continents, participants felt cold and aroused in fear, hot and
aroused in anger, and a “lump” in the throat for sadness.
Roseman et al. (1994) found that across different recalled emotion instances within a single culture, participants differentially
felt a lump in the throat and tired when feeling sadness, felt like
they’d “explode” when feeling anger, and “self-conscious” and
“small” when feeling shame. Roseman et al. (2010) found that

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

Roseman

participants differentially felt “a sense of lightness” in their
movements when feeling joy, “drawn to someone” when feeling
affection, and “more powerful” when feeling pride.

Consistency in Physiology
Physiological consistency across instances of an emotion has
been difficult to find, perhaps partly for reasons discussed earlier (e.g., physiological responses involved in emotions are also
influenced by many nonemotional processes; variable expression and behavior patterns in an emotion will have correspondingly varying physiology). Still, if discrete emotions are distinct
organized syndromes, structures (Frijda & Parrott, 2011), or
repertoires of readiness (Oatley & Johnson-Laird, 2011), we
might expect to see some evidence of common physiological
substrates.
There are some indications. The amygdala and cingulate
cortex circuitry that may organize at least some anger behaviors
(Potegal & Stemmler, 2010) was discussed earlier. Davis (1992)
has described neural pathways leading from the central nucleus
of the amygdala that influence many disparate components of
fear syndromes, such as increased respiration, heart rate, blood
pressure, and pallor; EEG arousal; vigilance; facial expressions
of fear; and behavioral freezing. Emotional disorders widely
believed to be at least partly physiologically mediated (e.g., by
serotonin-related systems in the brain) give evidence of the
kinds of response syndromes identified above for joy and sadness (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). That is, people
experiencing manic episodes characteristically feel elated, have
increased energy (decreased need for sleep) and movement
(e.g., psychomotor agitation), and move toward a wide variety
of consummatory and instrumental activities (e.g., increased
talkativeness, socializing, sexual behavior, and goal-directed
activity). Depressive episodes characteristically show an opposite pattern: sad mood, fatigue, psychomotor retardation, diminished appetite and libido, social withdrawal, and loss of interest
in pursuing formerly valued activities and goals. According to
Rozin, Haidt, and McCauley (2008), many studies suggest that
the anterior insula, basal ganglia, and portions of the prefrontal
cortex may typically be activated in disgust. So for particular
contacting, distancing, attack, and rejection emotions, there is
some evidence of physiological consistencies.

Possibilities for Integration
Like other theorists and researchers (e.g., Izard, 2007; Keltner
et al., 2003), I have maintained (Roseman, 2008) that dimensional and discrete perspectives on emotion are complementary,
and a framework that encompasses them both can be constructed.
Valence corresponds to a primary dimension of appraisal
(motive-consistency vs. -inconsistency) that determines pleasant
versus unpleasant feeling quality and groups emotion strategies
into those aiming to get more versus less of eliciting stimuli
(Tolman, 1923). This allows emotions to also function as
rewards versus punishments, as people behave to experience
more of positive emotions and less of negative emotions.

Emotional Behaviors, Goals, Strategies   441

Arousal may be related to the intensity of emotion (and
nonemotional processes) and influence the amount of cognitive,
affective, and behavioral resources allocated to a stimulus or
situation.2 Valence and arousal are thus important dimensions of
variation in emotional (and nonemotional) phenomena.
But valence and arousal, even in infinite possible combinations, are insufficient to account for the patterning of responses
in particular positive and negative emotions. For example, fear
and anger, both high-arousal negative emotions in dimensional
theories, differ significantly in characteristic facial expression
(e.g., Ekman, 2003), physiology (e.g., pallor vs. flushing),
behavior (e.g., freezing and flight vs. yelling and hitting), emotivation (seeking safety vs. revenge), and strategy (moving
away from something vs. moving against someone). These are
differences not just in degree, but in kind, and they can and
should be represented in our models of emotion.

Summary
In response to the great emotions debate, I have suggested that
constructivists (e.g., Barrett, 2006; Russell, 2003) and nativists
(e.g., Ekman, 1992; Izard, 2007) may both be correct, but in
different respects and under differing conditions.
Perhaps especially when emotion intensity is low, individuals can ignore or act counter to the urgings of emotion action
readinesses (see, e.g., Clark & Isen, 1982, on controlled
processing), and pursue emotivational goals in an infinite variety of ways. But as the stakes in an encounter increase, people
may be increasingly constrained to enact evolution-shaped or
well-learned patterns of action readiness, leading to emotional
responses that more closely resemble traditional conceptions of
“basic emotions.” Even in such instances, insofar as a particular
emotion has more than one associated pattern of action readiness (e.g., freezing vs. flight in fear), with the selection of
behavior influenced by situational conditions, we will find variability, including at least some variability in the central and
peripheral responses that prepare for and enact the alternative
emotional behaviors. But as with emotion-specific facial expressions, a contingent or complex relationship between an emotion
and its component responses is not an absence of relationship.
In answer to the question asked by Russell (2003), cited in
the introduction, I am proposing that the various responses of
each discrete emotion constitute a functional behavior class:
each discrete emotion corresponds to a different response strategy. Although all instances of an emotion will not be identical,
there may still be significant response consistencies, with sets of
species-typical phenomenology, physiology, expressive displays, and action readinesses observable in many situations, and
greatest consistency in each emotion’s underlying strategy and
emotivational goals.

Notes
1

Although yielding data that may be influenced by linguistic and
memory biases, these procedures allow investigation of feelings,
thoughts, and intense emotions, and are commonly used by researchers,
as in the “Relived Emotion Task” of Levenson, Carstensen, Friesen,
and Ekman (1991).

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

442  Emotion Review Vol. 3 No. 4

2

Arousal as conceptualized by most dimensional theorists is not the same
as emotion intensity. For example, according to Russell and Barrett
(1999, Figure 1), arousal differentiates emotions: people feeling fear are
typically more aroused than people feeling anger, who are much more
aroused than people feeling sadness. Yet emotion researchers (e.g.,
Frijda et al., 1992; Potegal & Qiu, 2010; Reisenzein et al., 2006)
commonly measure these and other emotions on intensity continua, so
particular emotions can each vary in intensity from very low to very
high (though some emotion words point to specific regions of an
emotion’s intensity continuum, as with the terms annoyance, anger, and
rage in Plutchik’s 1980 theory). Moreover, for some emotions (such as
fear and anger) increased emotion intensity may be characterized by
increased arousal, while for others (such as sadness and relief) increased
intensity is characterized by decreased arousal.

References

The American Heritage dictionary of the English language (4th ed.).
(2006). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. Retrieved from http://www.
thefreedictionary.com/tendency
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.
Aristotle. (1954). Rhetoric. In Rhetoric and poetics (W. R. Roberts, Trans.,
pp. 3–218). New York, NY: Random House. (Original work written
circa 330 BCE)
Averill, J. R. (1980). A constructivist view of emotion. In R. Plutchik &
H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research and experience, Vol. 1:
Theories of emotion (pp. 305–339). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Averill, J. R. (1982). Anger and aggression: An essay on emotion. New
York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Barrett, L. F. (2006). Are emotions natural kinds? Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 1, 28–58.
Barrett, L. F. (2009). Variety is the spice of life: A psychological construction approach to understanding variability in emotion. Cognition &
Emotion, 23, 1284–1306.
Barrett, L. F., Lindquist, K. A., & Gendron, M. (2007). Language as a context for the perception of emotion. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11,
327–332.
Blanchard, D. C., & Blanchard, R. J. (2005). Antipredator defense. In
I. Whishaw & B. Kolb (Eds.), The behavior of the laboratory rat
(pp. 335–343). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Camras, L. A., & Fatani, S. S. (2008). The development of facial expressions: Current perspectives on infant emotions. In M. Lewis,
J. M. Haviland-Jones & L. F. Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of emotions
(pp. 291–303). New York, NY: Guilford.
Cannon, W. B. (1932). The wisdom of the body. New York, NY: Norton.
Clark, M. S., & Isen, A. M. (1982). Toward understanding the relationship
between feeling states and social behavior. In A. H. Hastorf & A. M. Isen
(Eds.), Cognitive social psychology (pp. 73–108). New York, NY:
Elsevier.
Cole, P. M., Martin, S. E., & Dennis, T. A. (2004). Emotion regulation as a
scientific construct: Methodological challenges and directions for child
development research. Child Development, 75, 317–333.
Collier, G. (1985). Emotional expression. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Coulson, M. (2004). Attributing emotion to static body postures:
Recognition accuracy, confusions, and viewpoint dependence. Journal
of Nonverbal Behavior, 28, 117–139.
Darwin, C. R. (1872). The expression of the emotions in man and animals.
London, UK: Murray.
Davis, M. (1992). The role of the amygdala in fear and anxiety. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 15, 353–375.
Davitz, J. R. (1969). The language of emotion. New York, NY: Academic
Press.
De Rivera, J. (1977). A structural theory of the emotions [Monograph
No. 40]. Psychological Issues, 10.

Ekman, P. (1972). Universals and cultural differences in facial expressions
of emotion. In J. K. Cole (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation,
1971 (Vol. 19, pp. 207–283). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Ekman, P. (1973). Darwin and facial expression: A century of research in
review. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Ekman, P. (1992). An argument for basic emotions. Cognition & Emotion,
6, 169–200.
Ekman, P. (1994). Strong evidence for universals in facial expression: A
reply to Russell’s mistaken critique. Psychological Bulletin, 115, 268–287.
Ekman, P. (2003). Emotions revealed. New York, NY: Times Books.
Ekman, P., Sorenson, E. R., & Friesen, W. V. (1969). Pan-cultural elements
in facial displays of emotions. Science, 164, 86–88.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior:
An introduction to theory and research. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fridlund, A. J. (1991). Sociality of solitary smiling: Potentiation by an
implicit audience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60,
229–240.
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The emotions. New York, NY: Cambridge University
Press.
Frijda, N. H. (2007). The laws of emotion. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Frijda, N. H., Kuipers, P., & ter Schure, E. (1989). Relations among emotion, appraisal, and emotional action readiness. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 57, 212–228.
Frijda, N. H., Ortony, A., Sonnemans, J., & Clore, G. L. (1992). The complexity of intensity: Issues concerning the structure of emotion intensity.
In M. S. Clark (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology (Vol.
13, pp. 60–89). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Frijda, N. H., & Parrott, W. G. (2011). Basic emotions or ur-emotions?
Emotion Review, 3, 406–415.
Galati, D., Miceli, R., & Sini, B. (2001). Judging and coding facial expression of emotions in congenitally blind children. International Journal of
Behavioral Development, 25, 268–278.
Gendron, M., & Barrett, L. F. (2009). Reconstructing the past: A century of
ideas about emotion in psychology. Emotion Review, 1, 316–339.
Godsil, B. P., Tinsley, M. R., & Fanselow, M. S. (2003). Motivation. In
A. F. Healy & R. W. Proctor (Eds.), Handbook of psychology, Vol. 4.
Experimental psychology (pp. 33–60). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Green, J. A., Whitney, P. G., & Gustafson, G. E. (2010). Vocal expressions of
anger. In M. Potegal, G. Stemmler & C. Spielberger (Eds.), International
handbook of anger (pp. 139–156). New York, NY: Springer.
Hiatt, S. W., Campos, J. J., & Emde, R. N. (1979). Facial patterning and
infant emotional expression: Happiness, surprise, and fear. Child
Development, 50, 1020–1035.
Izard C. E. (1971). The face of emotion. New York, NY: Appleton Century
Crofts.
Izard, C. E. (1977). Human emotions. New York, NY: Plenum.
Izard, C. E. (2007). Basic emotions, natural kinds, emotion schemas, and a
new paradigm. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 2, 260–280.
Izard, C. E., & Haynes, O. (1988). On the form and universality of the
contempt expression: A challenge to Ekman and Friesen’s claim of
discovery. Motivation and Emotion, 12, 1–16.
John, O. P., & Gross, J. J. (2004). Healthy and unhealthy emotion regulation: Personality processes, individual differences, and lifespan
­development. Journal of Personality, 72, 1301–1333.
Keltner, D., Ekman, P., Gonzaga, G. C., & Beer, J. (2003). Facial expression
of emotion. In R. J. Davidson, K. R. Scherer & H. H. Goldsmith (Eds.),
Handbook of affective sciences (pp. 415–432). New York, NY: Oxford.
Landis, C. (1924). Studies of emotional reactions. II. General behavior and
facial expression. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 4, 447–510.
Lang, P. J. (1988). What are the data of emotion? In V. Hamilton, G. H. Bower
& N. H. Frijda (Eds.), Cognitive perspectives on emotion and motivation
(pp. 173–191). Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic.
Lazarus, R. S. (1991). Emotion and adaptation. New York, NY: Oxford.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious underpinnings
of emotional life. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

Roseman

Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., Friesen, W. V., & Ekman, P. (1991).
Emotion, physiology, and expression in old age. Psychology and Aging,
6, 28–35.
Lewis, M. D., & Liu, Z. (2011). Three time scales of neural self-organization underlying basic and nonbasic emotions. Emotion Review, 3, 416–
423.
Matsumoto, D., & Ekman, P. (2004). The relationship among expressions,
labels, and descriptions of contempt. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87, 529–540.
Matsumoto, D., & Willingham, B. (2009). Spontaneous facial expressions
of emotion of congenitally and non-congenitally blind individuals.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 1–10.
Mischel, W. (2004). Toward an integrative science of the person. Annual
Review of Psychology, 55, 1–22.
Oatley, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2011). Basic emotions in social rela­
tionships, reasoning, and psychological illnesses. Emotion Review, 3,
424–433.
Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective neuroscience: The foundations of human and
animal emotions. New York, NY: Oxford.
Plutchik, R. (1980). A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion. In
R. Plutchik & H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and
experience: Vol. 1. Theories of emotion (pp. 3–33). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Potegal, M. (2010). The temporal dynamics of anger: Phenomena, processes, and perplexities. In M. Potegal, G. Stemmler & C. Spielberger
(Eds.), International handbook of anger (pp. 385–401). New York, NY:
Springer.
Potegal, M., & Qiu, P. (2010). Anger in children’s tantrums: A new, quantitative, behaviorally based model. In M. Potegal, G. Stemmler &
C. Spielberger (Eds.), International handbook of anger (pp. 193–217).
New York, NY: Springer.
Potegal, M., & Stemmler, G. (2010). Constructing a neurology of anger.
In M. Potegal, G. Stemmler & C. Spielberger (Eds.), International
handbook of anger (pp. 39–59). New York, NY: Springer.
Reisenzein, R., Bördgen, S., Holtbernd, T., & Matz, D. (2006). Evidence for
strong dissociation between emotion and facial displays: The case of
surprise. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 295–315.
Roseman, I. J. (1984). Cognitive determinants of emotions: A structural
theory. In P. Shaver (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology
(Vol. 5, pp. 11–36). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Roseman, I. J. (2001). A model of appraisal in the emotion system:
Integrating theory, research, and applications. In K. R. Scherer, A. Schorr
& T. Johnstone (Eds.), Appraisal processes in emotion: Theory, methods,
research (pp. 68–91). New York, NY: Oxford.
Roseman, I. J. (2008). Motivations and emotivations: Approach, avoidance,
and other tendencies in motivated and emotional behavior. In A. J. Elliot

Emotional Behaviors, Goals, Strategies   443

(Ed.), Handbook of approach and avoidance motivation (pp. 343–366).
New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Roseman, I. J., Swartz, T. S., Newman, L., & Nichols, N. (2010).
Phenomenology, behaviors, and goals also differentiate positive emotions.
Unpublished manuscript, Rutgers University.
Roseman, I. J., Wiest, C., & Swartz, T. S. (1994). Phenomenology, behaviors,
and goals differentiate discrete emotions. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 67, 206–221.
Rozin, P., Haidt, J., & McCauley, C. R. (2008). Disgust. In M. Lewis,
J. M. Haviland-Jones & L. F. Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of emotions
(3rd ed., pp. 757–776). New York, NY: Guilford.
Russell, J. A. (2003). Core affect and the psychological construction of
emotion. Psychological Review, 110, 145–172.
Russell, J. A., & Barrett, L. F. (1999). Core affect, prototypical emotional
episodes, and other things called emotion: Dissecting the elephant.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 805–819.
Scherer, K. R., & Wallbott, H. G. (1994). Evidence for universality and
cultural variation of differential emotion response patterning. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 310–328.
Shaver, P., Schwartz, J., Kirson, D., & O’Connor, C. (1987). Emotion
knowledge: Further exploration of a prototype approach. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 1061–1086.
Stemmler, G. (2010). Somatovisceral activation during anger. In
M. Potegal, G. Stemmler & C. Spielberger (Eds.), International handbook of anger (pp. 103–121). New York, NY: Springer.
Tolman, E. C. (1923). A behavioristic account of the emotions. Psychological
Review, 30, 217–227.
Tomkins, S. S. (1962). Affect, imagery, consciousness: Vol. 1. The positive
affects. New York, NY: Springer.
Tomkins, S. S. (1963). Affect, imagery, consciousness: Vol. 2. The negative
affects. New York, NY: Springer.
Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2008). The nonverbal expression of pride:
Evidence for cross-cultural recognition. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 94, 516–530.
Weiner, B. (1985). An attributional theory of achievement motivation and
emotion. Psychological Review, 92, 548–573.
Williams, K. D. (2001). Ostracism: The power of silence. New York, NY:
Guilford.
Wundt, W. (1893). Grundzüge der physiologischen psychologie
[Principles of physiological psychology] (4th ed.). Leipzig, Germany:
Engelmann.
Young, P. T. (1949). Emotion as disorganized response–A reply to Professor
Leeper. Psychological Review, 56, 184–191.
Zeelenberg, M., van Dijk, W. W., Manstead, A. S. R., & van der Pligt, J.
(1998). The experience of regret and disappointment. Cognition &
Emotion, 12, 221–230.

Downloaded from emr.sagepub.com at RUTGERS UNIV on November 15, 2011

