World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology
International Journal of Biomedical and Biological Engineering
Vol:9, No:4, 2015

Noninvasive Brain-Machine Interface to Control Both
Mecha TE Robotic Hands Using Emotiv EEG
Neuroheadset
Adrienne Kline, Jaydip Desai


International Science Index, Biomedical and Biological Engineering Vol:9, No:4, 2015 waset.org/Publication/10000921

Abstract—Electroencephalogram (EEG) is a noninvasive
technique that registers signals originating from the firing of neurons
in the brain. The Emotiv EEG Neuroheadset is a consumer product
comprised of 14 EEG channels and was used to record the reactions
of the neurons within the brain to two forms of stimuli in 10
participants. These stimuli consisted of auditory and visual formats
that provided directions of ‘right’ or ‘left.’ Participants were
instructed to raise their right or left arm in accordance with the
instruction given. A scenario in OpenViBE was generated to both
stimulate the participants while recording their data. In OpenViBE,
the Graz Motor BCI Stimulator algorithm was configured to govern
the duration and number of visual stimuli. Utilizing EEGLAB under
the cross platform MATLAB®, the electrodes most stimulated during
the study were defined. Data outputs from EEGLAB were analyzed
using IBM SPSS Statistics® Version 20. This aided in determining
the electrodes to use in the development of a brain-machine interface
(BMI) using real-time EEG signals from the Emotiv EEG
Neuroheadset. Signal processing and feature extraction were
accomplished via the Simulink® signal processing toolbox. An
Arduino™ Duemilanove microcontroller was used to link the Emotiv
EEG Neuroheadset and the right and left Mecha TE™ Hands.

Keywords—Brain-machine interface, EEGLAB, emotiv EEG
neuroheadset, openViBE, simulink.
I. INTRODUCTION

B

RAIN-COMPUTER Interfaces (BCIs) are a relatively
new technology in the diagnosis and treatment of
conditions in numerous healthcare settings [1].
BCIs have applications for both rehabilitation and gaming.
BCIs are capable of allowing an individual to interact with
their external world based on specific thoughts recognized by
a computer as a recognizable pattern occurring within the
brain. Individuals simply think of an action to be fulfilled by
an external device, such as a prosthesis, wheelchair or
helicopter drone. These thoughts have specific neural patterns
that are recorded or enacted in real time using scalp electrodes
whose signal(s) are relayed to a computer on which algorithms
are generated that are responsible for initiating that action by
the external entity. To produce a continuous linkage between
Adrienne Kline is a master’s student in University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada. She has done research on Brain-Machine Interface at Indiana
Institute of Technology, Fort Wayne, IN 46803 USA (phone: 260-445-3119;
e-mail: askline1@gmail.com).
Jaydip Desai is an assistant professor of biomedical engineering at Indiana
Institute of Technology, Fort Wayne, IN 46803 USA (e-mail:
jmdesai@indianatech.edu).
This research was approved by Institutional Review Board at Indiana
Institute of Technology, Fort Wayne, IN 46803 USA.

International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 9(4) 2015

thought and action requires extensive iterations in neural
training and modification of the software algorithms to the
user so that it can properly carry out its facilitating role [6][8]. Although some BCI technologies are currently available,
research into how to standardize the system across users and
stabilize the software is still in its primitive stages [2].
The initial purpose behind this neuroscience study was to
determine whether an auditory or visual stimulus is more
effective when training a brain-computer interface. In this case
simple ‘right’ and ‘left’ directions were generated using the
freeware program OpenViBE. Also, the study sought to
determine which of the 14 electrodes on the Emotiv EEG
Neuroheadset were most effective in the creation of a BCI.
Based on these findings it should be possible to determine
which frequencies and electrode locations should be isolated
and filtered and processed in order to use the Emotiv EEG
Neuroheadset most effectively as a brain-machine interface
(BMI). BMI development will consist of using the Emotiv
EEG Headset, Simulink® a MATLAB® toolbox and an
Arduino™ Duemilanove microcontroller to establish
connection and control to two Mecha TE™ Hands.
Controlling the left and right Mecha TE™ Hands in real time
via EEG is a proof-of-concept to successfully regulating a
prosthesis or wheelchair movement for individuals with
compromised motor systems [5].
II. METHODS
This BMI project has been separated into four parts; Emotiv
EEG Neuroheadset and OpenViBE, Neuroscience Study
Procedure, EEGLAB analysis and brain-machine interface
setup.
A. Emotiv EEG Neuroheadset and OpenViBE
The 14 active sensors of the Emotiv EEG Headset™ were
soaked with 6 drops of saline solution prior to being placed in
the headset. The Emotiv Neuroheadset is of the wet sensor
type that reduces the amount of artifacts in the data [3], and
the sensor locations on the EEG Neuroheadset follow the 1020 international system [4]. Emotiv EEG Neuroheadset setup
software was used to ensure adequate connection during each
trial. Recording of the Emotiv EEG signals was attained
wirelessly using OpenViBE, a freeware designed to stimulate
the subject in both visual and auditory formats, record EEG
and display EEG signal output in real time.

323

scholar.waset.org/1307-6892/10000921

International Science Index, Biomedical and Biological Engineering Vol:9, No:4, 2015 waset.org/Publication/10000921

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology
International Journal of Biomedical and Biological Engineering
Vol:9, No:4, 2015

B. Neuroscieence Study Proocedure
This study was
w approvedd by Indiana Tech’s Instittutional
s
Review Boardd. Ten (five male and fivve female) subjects
beetween the agges of 21 and 224 years partiicipated in thee study,
alll of whom read
r
and signned the inforrmed consentt form.
Paarticipants haad the Emotiv EEG Neurroheadset plaaced on
thheir head and were seated in
i front of a computer
c
screeen in a
diimly lit officee. It was posittioned to ensuure that the ‘gground’
seensors were located
l
over the temporall bone of thhe skull
(ddirectly behindd the ear) andd that the fronnt-most sensorrs were
®
loocated three fiinger widths aabove the eyeebrow. The Emotiv
E
sooftware Headsset Setup ensuured the connnection betweeen each
seensor and the individual’s sscalp prior to beginning thee study,
w
while
the OpenViBE acquiisition server allowed connnection
beetween the heaadset and the OpenViBE sccenario.

Fig. 1 OpenViBE
O
Graz Motor Visuall Stimulations

Participants were
w
asked too remain as stiill as possiblee during
thhe experiment to lessen the effect of interrference from muscle
siggnals duringg the EEG recording. The Graz Motor
Sttimulation in OpenViBE generated
g
20 right arrows and 20
left arrows preesented in a random ordeer on the coomputer
sccreen as seen in Fig. 1 to act as visuall stimuli. Theey were
diirected to raisse their right arm
a when a right
r
arrow apppeared
annd to do the same with ttheir left arm
m when a leftt arrow
apppeared. Afteer a short brreak, participants were assked to
reespond to auditory (i.e., 20 ‘right and 20 ‘left’) stimuli
prresented againn in a randoom order by the computeer. The
paarticipants weere again askeed to raise their right arm during
d
a
‘right’ stimulattion and raisse their left arm during a ‘left’
f each of thee visual and auditory
a
stiimulation. Daata collection for
poortions lasted approxim
mately eighht minutes with
appproximately 10-seconds between eaach stimulus.. Each
testing session took approxim
mately 35 min
nutes. All recordings
w then savedd in the Europpean Data Filee (.EDF) form
were
mat.
C. EEGLAB Analysis
A
Data sets weere brought iinto and analyyzed in EEG
GLAB a
tooolbox that ruuns under the cross platform
m MATLAB®. Each
suubject’s audiio and visuaal .EDF files were proocessed
seeparately by fiirst reading inn the electrodee locations, rem
moving
thhe baseline andd running an Independent Component
C
Analysis
A
(ICA). The raw
w data could be viewed by
b selecting to
t view
EG scroll daata within EEGLAB.
E
W
When
generatiing the
EE
frequency timee domain outtputs from th
he channels, a Fast
Foourier Transfoorm (FFT) usiing (1) was peerformed. X (kk) and x
(nn) are output and
a input signnals respectiveely, N is the number
n
off points for FF
FT and k is thee index numbeer.

International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 9(4) 2015

∑

.

0,,1, …

1

(1)

Outputs suchh as the one seen
s
in Figs. 2-7
2 were gennerated.
Thhe implicationns of such outputs
o
are nnoted in the results
secction.
D. Brain-Macchine Interfacee Setup
The incominng EEG siggnals from the Emotiv EEG
Neeuroheadset were relayedd to Simuliink®, utilizin
ng the
EP
POC™ Simuliink® EEG Im
mporter. Once this connectioon was
esttablished a deemultiplexer w
was used to seeparate the inccoming
EE
EG signals into 14 separatte signals. Siggnal processinng was
performed on specific
s
channels, determiined from thee prior
neuroscience sttudy, for featuure extraction
n. This consissted of
filttering, noise removal, andd the control algorithm. Multiple
M
scoope boxes weere employed to view the EEG
E
output at
a each
staage in the scennario.
An Arduino™
™ Duemilanovve 8-bit microocontroller waas used
to establish com
mmunication between the designed Sim
mulink®
moodel and twoo Mecha TE™
™ Hands, a left
l
and rightt. EEG
control algorithhms were devveloped to reggulate left andd right
Meecha TE™ Hands in real-time thrrough Pulse--Width
Moodulation (PW
WM) signals.
Two Mecha TE™
T
Hands aare used in thee BMI development.
Eaach hand featuures 5 Futabaa® S3114 Miccro Servos (oone for
eacch of the 5 finngers), and thee maximum voltage
v
use is 5 volts
dirrect current (D
DC).
III. RESULTS
The results were
w divided innto 3 sections; neurosciencee study
ressults, neurosccience statistiical analysis, and brain-m
machine
intterface in real time.
A. Neurosciennce Study Resuults
EEG scroll data for chhannels F3, FC5,
F
F4 andd FC6
acccording to thee 10-20 Internnational Systeem, for all daata sets
weere generated using EEGLA
AB. Based on the EEG scrooll data
ouutputs in EEG
GLAB, it was clear thatt the sensorss most
im
mportant durinng audio and visual stimullation (becausse they
dissplayed the laargest changee in amplitudee) are F3, F44, FC5,
annd FC6. All foour of which aare located ovver the sensorrimotor
cortex. There were also ppeaks in the four most frontal
eleectrodes (F7, AF3, F6, AF
F4) however these
t
electroddes are
thee most suscepptible to faciaal muscle signnals and weree most
likkely the result of this interfe
ference. Figs. 2 and 3 demoonstrate
thiis occurrence in both a femaale and male data
d set.
Also, as notted prior, a FFT
F
was em
mployed to geenerate
freequency vs. tim
me outputs. T
These can be seen
s
in Figs. 4 and 5
below. These images demoonstrate that as frequencyy goes
above 30 Hz thaat the power ggenerated starrts to taper offf. This
woould be in acccordance withh the alpha and
a beta waveforms
thaat range from
m approximateely 8-12 Hz in
i the case off alpha
annd 12-28 for beeta.

324

scholar.waset.org/1307-6892/10000921

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology
International Journal of Biomedical and Biological Engineering
Vol:9, No:4, 2015

bottom 5% of the points on the distribution, a configuration
decided on and then implemented by EEGLAB.)

International Science Index, Biomedical and Biological Engineering Vol:9, No:4, 2015 waset.org/Publication/10000921

Fig. 2 EEG scroll data from female subject 2

Fig. 5 Frequency vs. time channel FC5 male subject 1

Fig. 3 EEG scroll data from male subject 2

Fig. 4 Frequency vs. time channel F4 for female subject 5

B. Neuroscience Statistical Analysis
The data for the graphed output from the 10 participants
were analyzed using IBM SPSS Statistics® Version 20. Four
sets of analyses were run using, as the dependent variable, the
distribution: 1) means, 2) trimmed means, 3) standard
deviations, and 4) trimmed standard deviations two of these
outputs used from EEGLAB are shown in Figs. 6 and 7.
(Trimmed statistics are based on the removal of the top and

International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 9(4) 2015

For each of the four analyses a mixed model analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was conducted. The variables included
gender (2 levels – female and male), channel (4 levels – F3,
FC5, FC6, and F4) and sensory modality used (2 levels auditory and visual).
Analysis of Means - The analysis of means resulted in one
significant interaction effect; gender by channel (F (3,24) =
3.300, p = .037). After collapsing across sensory modality
independent samples, t-tests showed that the interaction
occurred at two channels. Females had a lower mean (-.0026)
than males (.0013) on Channel FC5 (t(8) = -2.884, p = .020).
Females had a higher mean (.0000) than males (-.0033) on
Channel F4 (t(8) = 2.339, p = .047).
Analysis of Trimmed Means - The analysis of trimmed
means resulted in no significant effects
Analysis of Standard Deviations - The analysis of standard
deviations resulted in a significant main effect of channel (F
(3,24) = 10.066, p = .004). After collapsing across gender and
sensory modality, Bonferonni-corrected follow-up tests
revealed that channel F4 had a more narrow distribution
(130.8) than did channel FC5 (147.1) (t (18) = 16.371, p =
.006).
Analysis of Trimmed Standard Deviations - The analysis of
trimmed standard deviations also resulted in a significant main
effect of channel (F (3,24) = 6.868, p = .002). After collapsing
across gender and sensory modality, Bonferonni-corrected
follow-up tests revealed that channel F4 had a more narrow
distribution (20.9) than did channels F3 (27.9) (t(18) = 6.984,
p = .015) and FC6 (26.7) (t(18) = 5.799, p = .028).
No other systematic statistical differences based on 1)
gender, 2) modality, or 3) channels were observed.

325

scholar.waset.org/1307-6892/10000921

International Science Index, Biomedical and Biological Engineering Vol:9, No:4, 2015 waset.org/Publication/10000921

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology
International Journal of Biomedical and Biological Engineering
Vol:9, No:4, 2015

Fig. 6 Statistics output for channel F4 female subject 4

Fig. 7 Statistics output for channel F4 male subject 1

C. Brain-Machine Interface in Real-Time
Fig. 8 highlights the steps involved in the development of a
BMI. The electrodes chosen in order to control the Mecha
TE™ Hands were determined from the neuroscience study.
Using these four signals originating from the Emotiv EEG
Neuroheadset were relayed to Simulink® via an EPOC™
Simulink® EEG Importer. Signals were then separated, filtered
and amplified. A decision-making algorithm was responsible
for designating which hand was controlled.
IV. DISCUSSION

providing resistance to artifacts, thus giving a more
comprehensive EEG pattern. The statistical analysis showed
no statistical significance between auditory and visual
stimulation in initiating a response in the motor cortex.
However, it showed a relationship between sex and electrode
location. There was found to be a statistical significance
between females and F4 (electrode over the right portion of
the brain), and between males and FC5 (electrode over the left
portion of the brain). This may be the result of a connection
between males tending to use more left-brain and females
more right-brained [9].

The electrodes most important during audio and visual
stimulation were determined to be F3, F4, FC5, and FC6.
These sensors are all located along the motor cortex area of
the brain. Accuracy can be improved when recording EEG
signals by using a headset with additional sensors, and

International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 9(4) 2015

326

scholar.waset.org/1307-6892/10000921

World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology
International Journal of Biomedical and Biological Engineering
Vol:9, No:4, 2015

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

International Science Index, Biomedical and Biological Engineering Vol:9, No:4, 2015 waset.org/Publication/10000921

[8]

[9]

Y. M. Chi, T-P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, “Dry-contact and
noncontact biopotential electrodes: Methodological review.” IEEE
Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, vol. 3, pp. 106-119, Oct. 2010.
R. Homan, J. Herman, and P. Purdy, “Cerebral location of International
10-20 System electrode placement.” Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 6, pp. 376-382, April 1987.
J.L. Sirvent Blasco, E. Ianez, A. Ubeda et al., “Visual evoked potentialbased brain-machine interface applications to assist disabled people,”
Expert Systems with Applications, 2012.
G. Dornhege, J. Millan, T. Hinterberger, D. McFarland, K. Muller,
“General Signal Processing and Machine Learning Tools or BCI
Analysis,” in Toward Brain-Computer Interfacing, 2007, Massechusets,
ch. 13, sec. III, pp. 207-234.
J. Wolpaw, E. Wolpaw, “BCI Signal Processing: Feature Extraction,” in
Brain-Computer Interfaces, New York, Oxford Inc, 2012, ch. 7, sec. 3,
pp. 123-146.
B. He, A. Brockmeier, J. Principe, “Decoding Algorithms for BrainMachine Interfaces,” Neural Engineering, 2nd ed. New York, Springer,
2013, ch. 4, pp. 223-258.
A. Fukunaga, T. Ohira, M. Kamba, et al., “The Possibility of Left
Dominant Activation of the Sensorimotor Cortex During Lip Protrusion
in Men,” 2009, Springer.

Adrienne Kline completed the Bachelor of Science in biomedical engineering
from the department of biomedical engineering at Indiana Institute of
Technology, Fort Wayne, IN 46803 USA in 2014. She is a graduate student of
biomedical engineering at the University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta,
Canada.
She has done research on brain-machine interface in Human-Machine
Interface laboratory at Indiana Institute of Technology during her
undergraduate study in biomedical engineering.

Fig. 8 BMI flowchart

V. CONCLUSION
Based on the results acquired by completion and analysis of
the neuroscience data, it was determined that the main
electrodes stimulated when paired with a motor task were F3,
FC5, FC6 and F4, as per the 10-20 international system. These
results lead to the development of a successful BMI capable of
controlling both left and right Mecha TE™ Hands. This BMI
can be adjusted to the users’ need and preferences. Future
work requires more exploration into the effects of sex and
channel location, as well as work into making the BMI system
more robust and stable.

Jaydip M. Desai received the bachelor of technology degree in biomedical &
instrumentation engineering from the department of biomedical engineering at
U. V. Patel College of Engineering, Ganpat University, Kherva, India in 2008,
and the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees in biomedical engineering from the
department of chemistry, chemical-biology and biomedical engineering at
Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA in 2010 and 2013
respectively with specialization in robotics & control from the mechanical
engineering at Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ 07030 USA in
2012.
He is an assistant professor of biomedical engineering at Indiana Institute
of Technology, Fort Wayne, IN 46803 USA, where he conducts research and
teaching in the areas of biomedical robotics and instrumentation.
Dr. Desai is a member of IEEE, BMES, IACSIT and WASET. He served
as a reviewer for biomechanics, neural engineering and device technologies &
biomedical robotics tracks for the 2014 Annual Biomedical Engineering
Society (BMES) conference. Recently, Dr. Desai started Human-Machine
Interface laboratory in the department of biomedical engineering at Indiana
Institute of Technology, Fort Wayne, IN 46803 USA.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Adrienne Kline would like to thank Professor Jack Phlipot
for his continuing support and guidance and to Dr. Theresa
Kline for aiding in the statistical analysis.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

E. C. Leuthardt, G. Schalk, J. Roland, A. Rouse, and D.W. Moran,
“Evolution of brain-computer interfaces: Going beyond classic motor
physiology.” Neurosurgical Focus, vol. 27, pp. E4 1-11, July 2009.
S. Fok, R. Schwartz, M. Wronkiewicz, C. Hlmes, J. Zhang, T. Somers,
D. Bundy, and E. Leuthardt, “An EEG-based brain computer interface
for rehabilitation and restoration of hand control following stroke using
ipsilateral cortical physiology.” in Conference Proceedings of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Boston, MA, 2011, pp.
6277-6278.

International Scholarly and Scientific Research & Innovation 9(4) 2015

327

scholar.waset.org/1307-6892/10000921

