Brain Informatics (2017) 4:207–217
DOI 10.1007/s40708-017-0066-6

Brain connectivity during encoding and retrieval of spatial
information: individual differences in navigation skills
Greeshma Sharma . Klaus Gramann . Sushil Chandra .
Vijander Singh . Alok Prakash Mittal

Received: 2 November 2016 / Accepted: 27 April 2017 / Published online: 16 May 2017
Ó The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication

Abstract Emerging evidence suggests that the variations in
the ability to navigate through any real or virtual environment are accompanied by distinct underlying cortical activations in multiple regions of the brain. These activations
may appear due to the use of different frame of reference
(FOR) for representing an environment. The present study
investigated the brain dynamics in the good and bad navigators using Graph Theoretical analysis applied to lowdensity electroencephalography (EEG) data. Individual
navigation skills were rated according to the performance in
a virtual reality (VR)-based navigation task and the effect
of navigator’s proclivity towards a particular FOR on the
navigation performance was explored. Participants were
introduced to a novel virtual environment that they learned
from a first-person or an aerial perspective and were subsequently assessed on the basis of efficiency with which they
learnt and recalled. The graph theoretical parameters, path
length (PL), global efficiency (GE), and clustering

coefficient (CC) were computed for the functional connectivity network in the theta and alpha frequency bands. During
acquisition of the spatial information, good navigators were
distinguished by a lower degree of dispersion in the functional connectivity compared to the bad navigators. Within
the groups of good and bad navigators, better performers
were characterised by the formation of multiple hubs at
various sites and the percentage of connectivity or small
world index. The proclivity towards a specific FOR during
exploration of a new environment was
not found to have any bearing on the spatial learning. These
findings may have wider implications for how the functional
connectivity in the good and bad navigators differs during
spatial information acquisition and retrieval in the domains
of rescue operations and defence systems.

G. Sharma (&)  S. Chandra
Biomedical Engineering Department, INMAS, DRDO,
Delhi 110054, India
e-mail: greeshmacct@gmail.com

1 Introduction

S. Chandra
e-mail: sushil.inmas@gmail.com
K. Gramann
Biological Psychology and Neuroergonomics, Institute of
Technology, University of Berlin, 10587 Berlin, Germany
e-mail: klaus.gramann@tu-berlin.de
V. Singh  A. P. Mittal
Instrumentation and Control Engineering Department, NSIT,
Dwarka, Delhi 110078, India
e-mail: vijaydee@gmail.com
A. P. Mittal
e-mail: mittalap@gmail.com

Keywords Spatial navigation  Spatial memory  Brain
connectivity  Reference frame proclivity  Graph theory

Accurate spatial representations of our surroundings are
essential for successful orientation within the environment.
Spatial representation entails information about the spatial
arrangements of entities based on an egocentric or an allocentric frame of reference (FOR) [1, 2]. On the basis of
allocentric or/and egocentric frame of reference, a cognitive
map is constructed for any given environment entailing
information on metric relationships such as distance and
relative position of the landmarks (equivalent to survey
knowledge acquisition) [3]. Construction of a map-like
representation is based on an individual’s egocentric experience through the senses (vision, kinesthesis, and others)
that has to be translated into an allocentric frame of reference

123

208

[4]. This translation takes place at different time scales and
to different degrees of accuracy but leads to the parallel
existence and use of several egocentric and allocentric
frames of reference [5, 6]. The individual choice of a specific
spatial frame of reference can be influenced by variables
such as the context of the task, experience, time, and the goal
of the journey. Of particular relevance for the present study
is to understand how retrieval of spatial information is
influenced when the method of acquisition is the first-person
perspective followed by an aerial perspective. Torok et al.
[7] demonstrated a preference for an egocentric FOR when
an environment was explored from a first-person perspective
as compared to the preference to use an allocentric FOR
when participants learnt an environment from an aerial
perspective (map).
Evolution of the mechanism of memory stems from the
mechanism of navigation [8]. This extends support to the
hypothesis of a phylogenetic continuity and a direct relationship between the navigation and memory processes.
Within this model, the hippocampus is considered as a central
hub for the shared neural mechanisms that are recruited
during navigation and declarative memories (episodic and
semantic memory). The dichotomy of declarative memories
is distinguishable like the two forms of the spatial frame of
reference. Expanding on this idea, allocentric representation
and semantic memory on one hand and egocentric representation and episodic memory on the other, support a common
network for memory and navigation. Along the same lines,
the integration of multiple routes into a cognitive map might
be related to the integration of episodic memory contents with
a semantic network [9]. In addition, the series of events
encoded as spatial memory can be represented with the full
support of episodic memory. All these shreds of evidence
reflect the interwoven networks of navigation and memory
[10]. This is the focal point of our study, as we have compared
good and bad navigators with respect to their retrieval of
spatial knowledge (memory and navigation).
The temporal dynamics of the brain activity during
spatial navigation and memory can be investigated with
high temporal resolution using electroencephalography
(EEG). Cognitive processes underlying memory and navigation are realised through neural activity in a distributed
cortical network which can be recorded by EEG. Coherence measures of these oscillations are estimators of the
synchrony between two or more continuous time series of
brain activity. The instantaneous phase of a signal can be
estimated by using the analytical concept of the Hilbert
Transform. The quantification of phase synchronisation is
crucial because it might serve as a mediator for large-scale
cognitive integration and the coordination of different task
relevant to neural assemblies [11]. The functional significance of phase synchronisation lies in the fact that it
enables the engagement of target neurons and facilitation

123

G. Sharma et al.

of inter-regional interaction with the appropriate phase
differences while simultaneously suppressing out of phase
neural inputs [12].
Most of the work on phase synchronisation and memory
has been focused on theta (4–7 Hz) and alpha (8–13 Hz)
frequency bands because these bands support long-distance
cortical interactions [13, 14]. Also, Cognitive functions are
often transiently coupled by theta and alpha band phase
synchronisation [17]. The theta band is associated with
memory maintenance [15] and the gating mechanism during
information processing. In addition, activity in this band
increases with task difficulty [13]. The dual function of theta
oscillations is realised as synaptic plasticity and the segregation of cell assemblies in the available phase space [16].
The theta time compression mechanism restrains the representation of memory and space [16]. The alpha band
interactions are the predominant characteristics of planning,
perception, as well as working memory function [18]. It is
imperative to conceive alpha oscillations in local and largescale cortical network from the perspectives of two alternative hypotheses: the inhibition hypothesis and the active
processing hypothesis. The inhibition hypothesis states that
alpha increases in task-irrelevant areas whereas it decreases
in task-related areas. The active processing hypothesis
postulates that alpha oscillation plays a role in task-relevant
regions. Although both hypotheses are contradictory in their
fundamentals, but they are necessary to maintain the default
mode network, as well as higher cognitive function [18].
Due to the central role of memory in the navigation, we
investigated the theta and alpha band during a virtual navigation task. Several studies demonstrated a pronounced role
of the theta and alpha band during navigation [19–21]. To
gain insights into the functional connectivity during navigation, we chose the alpha band for further exploration, as it
follows active and inhibition hypotheses which sustain
equilibrium. This, in turn, strikes a balance between functional segregation and functional integration in terms of
efficient connectivity. It reflects in the functional connectivity where harmony between opposing demands of functional integration and function segregation is maintained for
economical networking.
In the present study, we investigated the brain dynamics in
participants with good and bad navigation skills. Additionally, we analysed the brain connectivity changes in groups of
good and bad navigators during encoding of an aerial view
(map) of the environment which would encourage them to
build survey knowledge. Furthermore, the acquired survey
knowledge was compared to the brain dynamics during
exploration of the identical environment from a first-person
perspective and subsequent retrieval of a novel virtual
environment. Our study addressed four core questions: (1)
whether there would be changes in the brain connectivity for
the encoding and the retrieval of spatial information; (2)

Brain connectivity during encoding and retrieval of spatial information: individual

whether the brain dynamics can be compared for navigators
with good navigation skills and navigators with less pronounced navigation skills; (3) whether the proclivity to use a
specific FOR plays a role in shaping navigation performance
and the accompanying brain dynamics, and finally; (4)
whether variation in the navigation skills affect encoding of
the spatial information in memory.

2 Methods
2.1 Participants
Fifty young and healthy male participants (mean age
23.5 years, range 19–28 years) were chosen for the study. All
participants, except one, were right handed. Only male participants were chosen to avoid gender biases, as it has been
found in the earlier study [22] that males outperform females
in specific spatial tasks. All participants were from the Netaji
Subhas Institute of Technology (NSIT) and the Thapar
University. Also, a written informed consent was obtained
from them.
2.2 Experimental design and procedure
All participants underwent the Online Reference Frame
Proclivity Test [6] which divided them on the basis of the
preferred use of an egocentric or an allocentric frame of
reference in a virtual path integration task. In this task,
participants navigated through a star field environment, with
one straight start segment, a single turn, and one straight
final segment. At the end of the passage, participants
selected one out of four homing vectors indicating the
starting position of the passage. There were four alternative
homing arrows that pointed back up, back down, back left,
and back right. After a passage with a turn to the right, the
participant with egocentric proclivity was found to select the
homing arrow pointing back and to the left, while the participant with allocentric proclivity was found to select the
homing arrow pointing back and to the right. Responses
indicating left or right after a turn in the vertical direction (up
or down) were considered incorrect. The same was found to
be true for responses indicating up or down after heading
changes in the horizontal plane. Following this, participants
underwent a virtual navigation task designed in Unity 5.
They were shown a map of a shopping complex having ten
shops spread over two floors (Fig. 1). The participants were
asked to remember the map of the shopping complex prior to
navigating through the environment in virtual reality. The
time taken to memorise the map was self-paced. This phase
was termed as the encoding (Enc) phase. Once the participants had memorised the map, they entered the virtual
environment i.e. shopping complex and were asked to

209

complete a journey through the virtual environment from
and back to the starting position. This phase was called the
navigation (Nav) phase. In this phase, participants moved in
shopping complex using mouse and keyboard while sitting
calmly on a chair. They were instructed to visit each shop in
the minimum time. Based on their performance, participants
were classified as the ‘good navigators’ and ‘bad navigators’. The performance was evaluated on the basis of time
taken to learn the map (Panning Time), the time taken to
complete the navigation task (Navigation Time), the total
number of shops visited (Correct Scores), the total number
of shops omitted, and the total number of shops visited twice
(the last two fields indicate errors (Error)). Enc and Nav
phase constituted the spatial acquisition stage for the virtual
navigation task in two perspectives. The participants were
subsequently asked to draw a map of the environment on the
paper. This time period was defined as the retrieval (Ret)
phase. This phase was important to assess spatial memory
for the survey knowledge (constructed via a aerial view) and
route knowledge (constructed via the first-person perspective). EEG data was recorded continuously for each subject
during all the three phases (Enc, Nav, and Ret).
These two tasks, Online Reference Frame Proclivity Test
and virtual navigation task, were shown on 15-inch Lenovo
laptop. Performance scores were saved in the text file for
virtual navigation task which were further analysed for the
classification of participants. Total 30 min were spent while
performing the aforementioned tasks. One practice trial was
presented before the beginning of the virtual navigation task
to get acquainted with the virtual environment.
2.3 EEG data acquisition and analysis
EEG was recorded using a EMOTIV EPOC system with 14
electrodes placed according to the extended 10% system
(AF3, F7, F3, FC5, T7, P7, O1, O2, P8, T8, FC6,F4, F8,
AF4). Two reference electrodes were placed at the P3/P4.
Electrode impedance was kept below 5 kX. The data was
recorded with a sampling frequency of 128 Hz. In addition,
a notch filter was applied to filter out 50 Hz power line
interference. Muscular, line noise, and eye blink artifacts
were removed using independent component analysis
(ICA) in EEGLAB toolbox [23].
The EEG system is usually designed for brain–computer
interface, but several recent studies have used it for the basic
research [24, 25]. The experiment was conducted in a noisefree and dimly-lit room. Three segments (prior to the task, just
after cue presentation, and middle of the task) of one second
each was selected for further analysis. The filtered data (after
removal of artifacts) were decomposed and reconstructed
using Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) to extract theta
(4–7 Hz) and alpha (8–13 Hz) bands. Phase synchronisation
between pairs of electrodes was determined by computing

123

210

G. Sharma et al.

Fig. 1 Map of the virtual
environment used in this
experiment

their phase locking value using Hilbert Transform [26]. Phase
synchronisation, network measures (path length, clustering
coefficient, global efficiency, degree node, and network
density), and small world index were computed using brain
connectivity toolbox (brain-connectivity-toolbox.net) in
MATLAB [27]. Graph Theoretical analysis was based on a
complete 14 9 14 matrix of the selected frequency bands.
To assess functional connectivity during the encoding
and retrieval of spatial information in a virtual navigation
task, the ‘Graph Theoretical analysis’ has been applied to the
recorded EEG data. Functional connectivity patterns depict
the arrangement of ‘m’ different brain areas in the form of a
network. Graphs are characterised by indices such as clustering coefficient (CC), path length (PL), and global efficiency (GE). These indices describe the network as either
regular (high CC and high PL) or random (short CC and
short PL). Small world (SW) networks are formed with high
CC as in regular networks and PL equivalent to that of
random networks, with a probability p between 0 and 1. SW
networks realise the optimal balance of functional integration and segregation. Centrality metrics such as degree and
betweenness are used to identify the hubs within the network. The mean network degree is most commonly used as a
measure of density or the total ‘wiring cost’ of the network.
Network topology and connectivity have been hypothesised
to relate to behavioural and cognitive performance in psychiatric brain disorders [28] and in resting brain condition
[29]. A graph theoretical network analysis was carried out to
evaluate small world networks, in which connectivity was
determined by all pair-wise combinations of channels
resulting in 14 9 14 connectivity matrices of phase synchronisation. Analysis of the small world network requires

123

the degree and rewire parameters (probability of connection
at every node in the network). The rewire parameter, ‘n’, was
taken as 14 and calculated as log(n)/n. The small world
network computational model was based on the rewire
parameter and degree values of the 14 node connectivity and
adjacency matrix for alpha band. The threshold was kept
between 0.01 and 0.05, and the complete analysis was
repeated throughout this range. An edge was assumed to
exist if the value of phase synchronisation between a pair of
channels exceeded the value of this threshold. The small
world network computation gave a sparse matrix as an
output on which small world characteristics were computed,
namely path length (Lp) (minimum number of edges that
must be traversed to get from one node to another)and
clustering coefficient (Cp) (cliquishness of a local neighbourhood based on number of connections). When the
clustering coefficient was high and the path length was short,
a small world existed in the network. For the specific purpose of this study, signals were filtered to analyse the phase
synchronisation in the theta and alpha frequency bands.
Subsequently, Cp, Lp, Cr (clustering coefficient of a random
network), as well as Lr (Path length of a random network)
were compared with their ratios (Cp/Cr and Lp/Lr) to get
small world indices (SWi). Random graphs were generated
from the experimentally obtained graphs by a constrained
shuffle of the vertices keeping both the number of vertices
and the degree of distribution.
2.4 Statistical analysis
The study was based on comparison-group randomised
experimental design. Based on the performance matrix,

Brain connectivity during encoding and retrieval of spatial information: individual

‘K-means’ Clustering method (centre = 2) was applied to
classify participants as the good or bad navigators. This
technique was also applied to the recall score to distinguish
the best performers from the worst performers within a
group. Two-way ANOVA and one-way ANOVA were
employed to observe effect of FOR on response latency
and performance matrix, respectively. Similarly, one-way
ANOVA was applied on graph indices, PL,GE, and CC, for
computing differences between the good and bad navigators. For each phase, scatter plots of recall scores were
plotted with network density and SWi to evaluate ramification of individual differences.

3 Results
Participants were classified as those with an egocentric
strategy or allocentric strategy depending on the used
corresponding FOR in at least 19 out of 24 trials (75%)
[30, 31]. Subsequently, our sample size reduced from 50 to
28 participants (egocentric strategy = 21, allocentric
strategy = 7). On the other hand, on the basis of performance matrix (performance scores obtained during Nav
phase), further 28 participants were classified into eleven
good navigators (only 1 using an allocentric strategy) and
seventeen bad navigators (6 in allocentric strategy and 12
in egocentric strategy). The performance matrix was
computed on the ground of following cut-off values for
each variable: Correct Scores [ 8, Error \ 2, Navigation
Time B 170 s and Planning Time \ 100 s.
The remainder of the result section is organised as follows: first, descriptive subsets of behavioural outcome is
presented. These subsets were chosen to link spatial memory
with the navigation performance in the good and bad navigators. In addition, effect of reference frame proclivity is
evaluated with the performance. Second, Graph Theoretical
analysis is summarised to provide a comprehensive overview of the theta and alpha bands in the three phases. Finally,
the pattern of hubs activation in the cortical areas for navigators having degree of navigation skills is projected. Hubs
were identified on the basis of node degree that was equal to
the number of edges maintained by each node.

211

completeness (R3) as dependent measures. The final score
resulted from the agglomeration of the three components
with weights of 1, -1 and 1, respectively. The negative
weight associated with R2 reflected a penalty for each
instance of the following errors: E1: If the inner and outer
peripheries were not conserved or all the elements stacked
in a single row; E2: If the vertical and horizontal relationships between elements were not maintained; E3:
Omission of the cornered shops which was either the Art
Gallery or Post Office; E4: Addition of new elements that
were not present in the original map. R3 considered the
block diagram of the spatial layout of the building, wherein
the relative positions of all the shops in the building were to
be maintained. Only 25% of the good navigators demonstrated an astute performance, whereas 45% in the bad
navigators exhibited best performance in the retrieval
phase. This might suggests that it cannot be presumed that
a good navigator would also perform well in terms of
memory and the two variables (recall scores and performance scores) can not be linearly correlated.
Considering online proclivity test, response latency was
computed in the two categories: axis (yaw and pitch) and
response type/strategy (egocentric, allocentric, and incorrect). For statistical analysis, we excluded ‘incorrect’
response type from online proclivity test. For analysis, first,
a two-way ANOVA with factor axis and response type was
calculated to root out differences in the response latency.
The analysis revealed non-significant effect of factor axis,
F(1, 210) = 2.8, p [ 0.05, and factor response type, F(1,
210) = 3.545, p [ 0.05. Second, one-way ANOVA was
applied to see interaction effect of response latency on the
navigation performance. The results showed that that neither
of the two FORs introduced any bias, positive or negative, to
the aggregate performance measure, F(4, 22) = 1.427,
p [ 0.05.
Recorded EEG data during the Nav, Enc, and Ret phases
was analysed using Graph Theoretical analysis. The three
segments of EEG data (prior to the task, just after cue presentation, and middle of the task) for each phase were processed separately and subsequently graph parameters were
computed and analysed for the good and bad navigators.
3.2 Theta band analysis

3.1 Behavioural data analysis
Recall scores gathered from drawing the sketch map of the
traversed route was further evaluated to measure extent of
the spatial learning in the participants. Subsequently, on the
basis of recall scores, participants were classified as the
best and worst performers within the group. The drawn
sketch map allowed for quantifying the recall of spatial
relations with the number of recalled shops (R1), the
number of order breaks (R2), and the percentage of

The functional connectivity network of the bad navigators
demonstrated higher values of PL, GE, and CC for the Enc
and Ret phases compared to the Nav phase (Fig. 2).A
reverse trend was observed in the Nav phase with network
parameters in the good navigators where the values for PL,
GE, and CC were found to be higher. During the Nav
phase, CC was found to be significantly lower in the good
navigator compared to the bad navigator, F(1, 84) = 10.86,
p \ 0.01.

123

212

G. Sharma et al.

Fig. 2 Graph parameters for
Theta (4–7 Hz) wave
synchronisation during
encoding (Enc) phase,
navigation (Nav) phase and
retrieval (Ret) phase of the task.
Only clustering coefficient (CC)
was found to be significant in
Ret phase, p = 0.001

3.3 Alpha band analysis
In the case of the bad navigators, alpha band analysis
indicated higher values for PL, GE, and CC for all the three
phases except the Nav phase. While for the good navigator,
values of PL, GE, and CC were elevated in the Nav phase.
(Fig. 3). It was noticed that the CC in the Nav phase for the
bad navigators was significantly lower compared to the
good navigator, F(1, 84) = 9.0, p$ \ $0.01. As a consequence, the small world index (SWi) was computed in the
Nav phase. Based on the participant’s recall scores, a
scatter plot was drawn between the recall score and the
network density for the Enc and Ret phases while for the
Nav phase, only SWi was considered. The results were
plotted only for alpha band, as a balance between inhibition
Fig. 3 Graph parameters for
Alpha (8–13 Hz) wave
synchronisation during
encoding (Enc) phase,
navigation (Nav) phase and
retrieval (Ret) phase of the task.
Only clustering coefficient (CC)
was found to be significant in
Ret phase, p = 0.007

123

and active processing could be achieved which would be
easily correlated with functional connectivity (based on our
assumption). Summarised graph parameters for all the
three phases in the good and bad navigators are shown in
Table 1 for theta and alpha bands.
We employed linear regression to test if the network
density of the individual network could significantly predict recall scores (behavioural outcome). Linear regression
was performed by regressing each participant’s performance against the total percentage connectivity of the
individual network. Percentage connectivity was defined as
the actual number of edges in the graph as a proportion of
the total number of possible edges. The percentage connectivity was positively correlated with the recall score in
both the groups for the Enc phase and Ret phase.

Brain connectivity during encoding and retrieval of spatial information: individual

213

Table 1 Mean (SD) for the graph parameters in different phases for theta and alpha bands
EEG bands

Phases

Graph parameters
Path length (PL)
Good navigator

Theta

Alpha

Bad navigator

Global efficiency (GE)

Clustering coefficient (CC)

Good navigator

Good navigator

Bad navigator

Bad navigator

Enc

0.86 (0.04)

0.86 (0.08)

0.86 (0.14)

0.86 (0.14)

1.5 (0.14)

Nav

0.83 (0.35)

0.85 (0.25)

0.83 (0.47)

0.85 (0.23)

1.6 (0.8)

1.62 (0.5)

1.6 (0.14)

Ret
Enc

0.82 (0.14)
0.63 (0.21)

0.86 (0.15)
0.71 (0.4)

0.82 (0.44)
0.63 (0.44)

0.86 (0.71)
0.71 (0.21)

1.5 (0.14)
0.63 (0.24)

1.3 (0.14)
0.71 (0.22)

Nav

0.65 (0.01)

0.64 (0.02)

0.65 (0.12)

0.64 (0.22)

0.65 (0.41)

0.64 (0.56)

Ret

0.64 (0.04)

0.68 (0.04)

0.64 (0.45)

0.68 (0.01)

0.64 (0.44)

0.68 (0.38)

Fig. 4 Scatter plot between recall score and total percentage
connectivity during Encoding phase in good navigator (R2 = 8%),
and poor navigator (R2 = 2%)

Fig. 5 Scatter plot between recall score and small world index (SWi)
during Navigation phase in good navigator (R2 = 1%), and poor
navigator (R2 = 0.08%)

However, the range of distribution was greater in the
bad navigators for the Enc phase compared to the good
navigator (Fig. 4). Differences were more visible in the
Nav phase, where SWi was negatively correlated with
recall scores in the bad navigators (Fig. 5). The scatter plot
for the Ret phase is displayed in Fig. 6.

were lesser compared to the good navigators. Those hubs
were left frontal, anterior frontal, and frontocentral sites.

3.4 Hub analysis
Hubs play a significant role in the information integration.
In the present study, number and location of active hubs
were compared within the group for recall scores. For the
good navigators, the best performers (higher recall score)
had the left frontal, anterior frontal, frontocentral, occipital
and, temporal leads as the hubs, while the worst performers
had the left frontal, anterior frontal, frontocentral, and
occipital electrode positions as the hubs. On the contrary,
for the bad navigators, similar hubs were active in the best
and worst performers; however, a number of active hubs

4 Discussion
The primary goal of the present study was to analyse the
changes in the brain connectivity in people with different
navigation skills, as they acquired and recalled survey and
route knowledge. In addition, we aimed at gauging the
potential effects of the FOR on the navigation performance
applying Graph Theoretical technique as an aid to identifying the connectivity patterns in participants with the
good and bad navigation skills. No effect of strategy was
found on the performance as revealed by non-significant
effect of FOR on performance and response latency from
online proclivity test. However, there was uneven performance distribution of participants (25% of best performers
in the good navigator group while 45% in the bad navigator

123

214

Fig. 6 Scatter plot between recall score and total percentage
connectivity during Retrieval phase in good navigator (R2 = 2%),
and poor navigator (R2 = 5%)

group), indicating navigation performance was independent of the spatial memory. The experiment was divided
into three phases, Enc, Nav, and Ret, to evaluate encoding
and retrieval stage separately. Graph Theoretical technique
was applied on physiological signals to compute graph
measures and network density/SWi for three phases separately. The insights and answers to the four main questions
addressed by this study are the following: (1) the divergence in the brain connectivity was analysed with respect
to the two main stages of spatial knowledge, Acquisition
Stage (Enc and Nav phases) and Recall Stage (Ret phase)
and it was found that the PL, GE, and CC varied across the
phases in both the group; (2) our study indicated that the
brain dynamics of the good navigators could be distinguished from those of the bad navigators on the basis of the
CC value of the resultant functional connectivity network
formed during the Nav phase; (3) there was no significant
effect of FOR on the performance; (4) the differences in
navigation skills had no bearing on the encoding of the
spatial information or navigation skill was not necessarily
accompanied by a different mechanism for the spatial
information representation during the Enc phase.
Graph measures, GE, PL, and CC, were calculated for
theta and alpha band. Only navigation phase in alpha band
showed reduced values of graph parameters for the bad
navigators. In addition, in retrieval phase, CC was found to
be lower in the bad navigator compared to the good navigator. A higher value of CC means that the network had
more local functional interconnections, and thus was more
efficient in terms of local information transfer [32].The
longer PL in the bad navigators signified less efficient
information transfer during the Enc phase compared to the
Nav phase. In the Ret phase, CC was higher for the bad

123

G. Sharma et al.

navigators, indicating a higher number of local interconnections. This might suggest that during the Nav phase, bad
navigators demonstrated gravitation towards a small world
network in both the theta and alpha bands. The formation
of a small world network also alluded a balance between
functional integration and functional segregation in the
local cortical regions. An elevated GE was observed in the
bad navigators during the Enc and Ret phases. GE refers to
the efficiency of information transfer between the nodes
through multiple paths. Increased GE and smaller PL signified a reduction in noise and an increment in synchrony
between different cortical areas. To sum up, only clustering
coefficient of the theta band was sufficient to distinguish
local information exchange for the good and bad navigator
during the navigation phase and retrieval phase. However
path length and global efficiency also varied within the
good and bad navigator, but these parameters were unable
to draw line of differences. This concludes that significant
change in the underlying cortical interconnections was
local rather than global in estimating individual differences
for navigation skills.
Till now, graph parameters provided the individual
difference based on the performance in the virtual navigation task. In terms of relationship between memory and
navigation performance, scatter plot provided emerging
pattern for the good and bad navigators. Memory as
depicted through recall score became storehouse of accumulated spatial knowledge in the Enc and Nav phases.
Variations in the recall scores among the two groups were
correlated with the network density and SWi. This lent a
perspective of overall network connectivity for both the
groups during all the three phases. Higher percentage
connectivity exhibited a greater degree of functional
interactions. The increase in SWi signified a more efficient
information transfer and a lower associated rewiring cost.
The percentage connectivity was positively correlated with
the recall score in both the groups for the Enc phase while
the reverse was observed in both the groups for the Ret
phase. However, in the Enc phase, range of dispersion was
higher for the bad navigators compared to the good navigators. Differences were more evident in the Nav phase
where SWi was negatively correlated with the recall scores
in the bad navigators. This observation could be attributed
by a possibility that people with the good navigation skills
inclined to remember their path right from the first time
they have encountered the map/route of the novel environment while people with the bad navigation skills put
greater mental efforts in accumulating primary knowledge
and acquired them through experience. The other reason
for such a notable differences in the Nav phase might be
that the bad navigators struggled to develop spatial
knowledge during the Enc phase and subsequently, to
compensate the loss of construction, they accelerated the

Brain connectivity during encoding and retrieval of spatial information: individual

assimilation of knowledge by constructing the small world
network during first-person exposure (Nav phase) to the
environment. This, in turn, explained the larger range of
dispersion during the Enc phase in the bad navigators
compared to the good navigators, whereas similar relations
were established during the Ret phase in both the groups.
To summarise, bad navigators displayed imprecise navigation skills reflecting the reduced connectivity in encoding spatial layout (knowledge acquisition through map and
experience). When comparing Ret phase, percentage connectivity of both the groups had similar linear correlations
with their recall score. This indicated that lesser brain
resources were utilised by both the group in the Ret phase
compared to the Enc phase, exhibiting lesser mental effort
while recalling the spatial information [33]. However, the
steep of curve was more sharper in the good navigator,
demonstrating efficient means to operate in the limited
resources. In conclusion, the differences between the bad
and good navigators existed right from the beginning of the
task. Bad navigators had more dispersion during the
Acquisition stage, whereas Recall stage had the similar
pattern as those of good navigators.
To distinguish the best and worst performers (on the basis
of recall score) within the group, we used the node degree for
estimating functional hubs. There were more functional
hubs in the best performers having good navigation skills.
More hubs indicated higher cortical synchronisation in the
network [34]. There were fewer functional hubs for participants with best and worst recall scores with the bad navigation skills. Interestingly, participants having best recall
scores resulted in numerous hubs and many more functional
connections compared to participants having worst recall
scores. An additional finding related to the hubs was the
dominance of left hemispheric activation. According to
hemispheric encoding/retrieval asymmetry (HERA) model
[35], right-hemispheric activation is correlated with the
episodic memory retrieval while left-hemispheric activation
is correlated with the semantic memory retrieval. However,
our findings were not congruent with the HERA model. One
reason for this might be that the participants associated the
episodic memory with the existing semantic maps of space
to support their navigation in the given novel environment
[36]. As proposed by Buzsaki and Moser [8], the integration
of episodic memory with the navigation was supported by
both episodic and semantic memory. Henceforth, memory
interaction with the spatial knowledge embodied the formation of hubs in the left-hemisphere.

5 Conclusions
We investigated the brain dynamics of subjects with the good
and bad navigation skills using Graph Theoretical technique

215

on low-density EEG data. This study also explored the
potential role of a proclivity for distinct FOR on navigation
performance. People with the good navigation skills showed
more functional connectivity during the acquisition of spatial
information (first-person perspective and aerial perspective)
as compared to people with bad navigation skills. Additionally, people with bad navigational skills showed a negative
correlation between the recall score and percent connectivity
during navigation phase or during learning from a first-person
perspective. Furthermore, both groups showed decrease in
the functional connectivity during retrieval phase, demonstrating lesser recruitment of the resources as supported by
fewer hubs activation. Moreover, the present study provided
an interesting finding that information encoding in spatial
memory was independent of the type of navigational skills
demonstrated by an individual. Thus, the findings provide the
variation in the underlying cortical activation associated with
the individual’s navigation skills. Similarly, extending
towards the exploration of memory and FOR in the shaping of
performance during navigation bestowed another dimension
in understanding the role of other factors in the navigation
skills. Although, this study explored the complex interplay of
FOR and the perspective and their impact on the spatial
information acquisition and recall, future studies should
address the possible combined impact of different FOR and
perspective pairs. Such knowledge would greatly refine our
understanding of navigation at the neural level which can then
be harnessed to design better training modules for personnel
involved in military, transportation, forest, and rescue
operations.
Acknowledgements We are grateful to the Director INMAS, DRDO,
New Delhi for supporting the research. We are also grateful to the
faculty of NSIT and Thapar Institute for providing us the participants
for this study.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creative
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link
to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

References
1. Gramann K (2013) Embodiment of spatial reference frames and
individual differences in reference frame proclivity. Spat Cognit
Comput 13(1):1–25
2. Klatzky RL (1998) Allocentric and egocentric spatial representations: definitions, distinctions, and interconnections. In: Spatial
cognition, Springer, pp 1–17
3. Tolman EC (1948) Cognitive maps in rats and men. Psychol Rev
55(4):189
4. Siegel AW, White SH (1975) The development of spatial representations of large-scale environments. Adv Child Dev Behav
10:9

123

216
5. Burgess N, Spiers HJ, Paleologou E (2004) Orientational
manoeuvres in the dark: dissociating allocentric and egocentric
influences on spatial memory. Cognition 94(2):149–166
6. Goeke CM, Konig P, Gramann K (2013) Different strategies for
spatial updating in yaw and pitch path integration. Front Behav
Neurosci 7:5
7. Torok A, Nguyen TP, Kolozsvari O, Buchanan RJ, Nadasdy Z
(2014) Reference frames in virtual spatial navigation are viewpoint dependent. Front Hum Neurosci 8
8. Buzsaki G, Moser EI (2013) Memory, navigation and theta
rhythm in the hippocampalentorhinal system. Nat Neurosci
16(2):130–138
9. Maguire EA, Mullally SL (2013) The hippocampus: a manifesto
for change. J Exp Psychol Gen 142(4):1180
10. Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ (2014) Can we reconcile the declarative memory and spatial navigation views on hippocampal
function? Neuron 83(4):764–770
11. Singer W (2009) Distributed processing and temporal codes in
neuronal networks. Cogn Neurodyn 3(3):189–196
12. Uhlhaas P, Pipa G, Lima B, Melloni L, Neuenschwander S, Nikolic
D, Singer W (2009) Neural synchrony in cortical networks: history,
concept and current status. Front Integr Neurosci 3:17
13. Klimesch W (1999) EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect
cognitive and memory performance: a review and analysis. Brain
Res Rev 29(2):169–195
14. Lega BC, Jacobs J, Kahana M (2012) Human hippocampal theta
oscillations and the formation of episodic memories. Hippocampus 22(4):748–761
15. Jensen O, Tesche CD (2002) Frontal theta activity in humans
increases with memory load in a working memory task. Eur J
Neurosci 15(8):1395–1399
16. Jensen O, Lisman JE (2005) Hippocampal sequence-encoding
driven by a cortical multi-item working memory buffer. Trends
Neurosci 28(2):67–72
17. Palva JM, Monto S, Kulashekhar S, Palva S (2010) Neuronal
synchrony reveals working memory networks and predicts individual memory capacity. Proc Natl Acad Sci 107(16):7580–7585
18. Palva S, Palva JM (2007) New vistas for a-frequency band
oscillations. Trends Neurosci 30(4):150–158
19. Gramann K, Onton J, Riccobon D, Mueller HJ, Bardins S,
Makeig S (2010) Human brain dynamics accompanying use of
egocentric and allocentric reference frames during navigation.
J Cogn Neurosci 22(12):2836–2849
20. Lin CT, Chiu TC, Gramann K (2015) EEG correlates of spatial
orientation in the human retrosplenial complex. NeuroImage
120:123–132
21. Plank M, Muller HJ, Onton J, Makeig S, Gramann K (2010) Human
EEG correlates of spatial navigation within egocentric and allocentric reference frames. In: Spatial cognition VII, Springer, pp 191–206
22. Coluccia E, Louse G (2004) Gender differences in spatial orientation: a review. J Environ Psychol 24(3):329–340
23. Delorme A, Makeig S (2004) EEGLAB: an open source toolbox
for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics including independent
component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134(1):9–21
24. Chandra S, Verma KL, Sharma G, Mittal A, Jha D (2015) EEG
based cognitive workload classification during NASA MATB-II
multitasking. Int J Cognit Res Sci Eng Educ (IJCRSEE) 3(1):35–41
25. Chandra S, Sharma G, Mittal AP, Jha D et al (2016) Effect of
sudarshan kriya (meditation) on gamma, alpha, and theta rhythm
during working memory task. Int J Yoga 9(1):72
26. Rosenblum M, Pikovsky A, Kurths J, Schäfer C, Tass PA (2001)
Phase synchronization from theory to data analysis. Handb Biol
Phys 4(279–321):93–94
27. Rubinov M, Sporns O (2010) Complex network measures of brain
connectivity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage 52(3):1059–1069

123

G. Sharma et al.
28. Bullmore E, Sporns O (2012) The economy of brain network
organization. Nat Rev Neurosci 13(5):336–349
29. Tomasi D, Volkow ND (2012) Resting functional connectivity of
language networks: characterization and reproducibility. Molecular Psychiatry 17(8):841–854
30. Goeke C, Kornpetpanee S, Köster M, Fernández-Revelles AB,
Gramann K, König P (2015) Cultural background shapes spatial
reference frame proclivity. Sci Rep 5:11426
31. Gramann K, Wing S, Jung TP, Viirre E, Riecke BE (2012)
Switching spatial reference frames for yaw and pitch navigation.
Spat Cognit Comput 12(2–3):159–194
32. Rubinov M, Knock SA, Stam CJ, Micheloyannis S, Harris AW,
Williams LM, Breakspear M (2009) Small-world properties of
nonlinear brain activity in schizophrenia. Hum Brain Mapp
30(2):403–416
33. Mallow J, Bernarding J, Luchtmann M, Bethmann A, Brechmann
A (2015) Superior memorizers employ different neural networks
for encoding and recall. Front Syst Neurosci 9
34. van den Heuvel MP, Sporns O (2013) Network hubs in the human
brain. Trends Cogn Sci 17(12):683–696
35. Tulving E, Kapur S, Craik F, Moscovitch M, Houle S (1994)
Hemispheric encoding/retrieval asymmetry in episodic memory:
positron emission tomography findings. Proc Natl Acad Sci
91(6):2016–2020
36. Eichenbaum H (2004) Hippocampus: cognitive processes and
neural representations that underlie declarative memory. Neuron
44(1):109–120

Greeshma Sharma has joined Defence R&D Organisation of Indian
Min of Defence in 2012 after completing her masters in cognitive
science from University of Rajasthan. She has submitted her PhD
Thesis on navigation performance and psychophysiological evaluation in the university of Delhi. She is academically strong and
hardworking researcher with 5? years of research experience with
DRDO in the field of neuro - cognitive sciences. She has 21 papers
already published in reputed international journals and 7 papers in
process of getting published. She has strong management skills in
expediting project work and Coordinating multiple projects with
different institutions simultaneously while researching and technically
leading project of the host institute. Her research interest includes
Spatial Cognition, Virtual Environment, Cognitive Processes, Signal
Processing, Applied Cognition, and Neuro-cognition.
Klaus Gramann is head of Biological Psychology and Neuroergonomics at Technische Universität Berlin. He studied Psychology in
Gießen, Germany, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, and in Aachen,
Germany where he received his diploma in Psychology and subsequently his PhD in Experimental and Psychology in 2002 from the
Rheinisch-Westfälisch Technische Hochschule Aachen (RWTH). He
worked in Munich with Hermann Müller as postdoc building the
Munich EEG-network. In 2007 he moved to San Diego to work with
Scott Makeig to work on Mobile Brain/Body Imaging methods to
investigate human brain dynamics in actively behaving participants.
He has been working as visiting Professor at the National Ciao Tung
University in Taiwan and the University of Osnabrück in Germany
before accepting a position at the Technische Universität Berlin in
2012. He has a keen interest in the neuroscience of embodied
cognition with a focus on spatial cognitive processes, visual attention,
and neuroergonomics.
Sushil Chandra has 30 years of experience in the research of
Defences. He has done his Masters in Biomedical engineering from
Aligarh Muslim University. He is pursuing his PhD from Delhi
University. He has worked on the various project of Cognitive

Brain connectivity during encoding and retrieval of spatial information: individual
science, Virtual reality applications in Defence and Cognitive
Rehabilitation. In addition, he had experienced Biomedical Technology, Biosensors, Defence Electronics, Telemedicine, Image Compression. His work has a purpose of designing performance enhancing
technology that can accommodate real world cognitive stressors, such
as sleep deprivation, workload, and physical exertion identifying
performance matrices for assisting both individual and team cognition
performance in network centric warfare (NCW) settings. His research
interest involves brain dynamics of every cognitive process through
EEG and different interventions like Meditation techniques,
Videogames.
Vijander Singh received his B. Tech in Electrical Engineering in
1995 from G.B. Pant University of Agriculture and Technology Pant
Nagar in Uttarakhand. He received M.E. in Electrical Engineering in
2000 and Ph. D in 2007 from IIT Roorkee. He has published 60
papers in international refereed journals and conferences. He has

217

chaired many international conferences. More than 28 M.Tech theses
have been completed under his guidance. At present, he is working as
Professor in Instrumentation and Control Engineering Division at
Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, New Delhi, affiliated to
University of Delhi, Delhi. He is Warden, Vigilance Officer of the
Institute, Chairman House Allotment Committee, and Dean Alumni
Affairs, NSIT. His areas of research are Process Control, Biomedical
Instrumentation, Artificial Intelligence and Image Processing.
Alok Prakash Mittal is currently holding a post of MemberSecretary All India Council For Technical Education. He has
experience of teaching instrumentation and control engineering for
31 years. He has completed his masters in Power Apparatus &
Electric Drives from University of Roorkee and PhD in Power
Electronics from IIT Delhi. His current research area involves Power
system, signal Processing, and manipulating controllers.

123

