INVESTIGATION OF RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN CHANGES IN EEG FEATURES AND
SUBJECTIVE QUALITY OF HDR IMAGES
Shaymaa Al-Juboori, Is-Haka Mkwawa, Lingfen Sun and Emmanuel Ifeachor
Signal Processing and Multimedia Communication
Plymouth University, UK
E-mail: {shaymaa.al-juboori, is-haka.mkwawa, l.sun, e.ifeachor}@plymouth.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
Quality of Experience (QoE) assessment of multimedia
services is a challenging task and an understanding of how
the user perceives quality at the physiological level would
facilitate this. Physiological signals, such as the
electroencephalogram (EEG), have shown promise in
revealing the subject’s emotion or attention in quality
assessment and the correlation of this with media service
quality. This paper investigated the relationships between
changes in EEG features and subjective quality test scores
(i.e. MOS) for High Dynamic Range (HDR) images viewed
with a mobile device. Results show that changes in the
gamma and beta bands correlated negatively with MOS,
whereas positive correlations were observed in the alpha
band. Coupling between activities in the delta and beta bands
(i.e. positive correlation between power in the fast beta and
slow delta frequency bands) is related to anxiety and
dissatisfaction. Thus, the results suggest that increases in the
degree of coupling are associated with decreases in HDR
quality. This also suggests that in the HDR image QoE
assessment, human emotions play a significant role.
Potentially, these findings may be exploited in objective QoE
perception modelling.
Index Terms— High dynamic range images, quality of
experience, electroencephalography, Mean Opinion Scores,
delta-beta coupling, subjective tests.
1. INTRODUCTION
QoE is an important issue in various image and video
applications. It is necessary to understand how humans
perceive quality from visual stimuli as this can be potentially
exploited for developing and optimizing images and video
processing algorithms [1].
Recently, image consumption using mobile devices has
become increasingly popular because of the availability of
smartphones capable of producing and consuming HDR
images and advances in high-speed wireless communication
networks. One of the most critical issues in mobile HDR
image delivery services is how to maximize the QoE of the
users for the delivered contents. An open research question is
how HDR images with different contents perform on mobile
phones [2].
Traditionally, evaluation of perceived quality of multimedia
content is done using subjective opinion tests, such as Mean
Opinion Scores (MOS). However, it is difficult for the user
to link the experienced quality to the quality scale. Moreover,

MOS does not give an insight into how the user really feels,
at the physiological level, in response to dislikes or
satisfactions with the perceived quality [3].
To address this issue, measures which can be taken directly
(implicitly) from the participant have attracted interest. The
electroencephalogram (EEG) is a promising approach which
may be used to assess quality related processes implicitly [2].
At present, there is no standard for using electrophysiology
to assess QoE, but contributions are being made to the ITUT on the use of physiological measures for QoE (e.g. ITU-T
Contribution COM 12-(039, 112, 103, and 202). However,
implicit QoE approaches are still in the early stages and
further research is necessary to better understand the nature
of the recorded neural signals and their associations with
user-perceived quality from QoE perspectives [5].
We propose a novel electrophysiology-based QoE
assessment approach for HDR image quality which may be
used to predict perceived image quality. Previous studies [3]
[6] [7] [10] have demonstrated that physiological
measurements provide valuable insight into QoE of advanced
media technologies. In our study, the correlation between the
mean power in the delta and beta bands is used as a measure
of the coupling between the activities in these bands. This is
linked with negative behavioural characteristics (e.g. anxiety,
frustration, dissatisfaction). Our study is based upon clinical
findings [12-16] which suggest that increased EEG delta-beta
coupling promotes behavioural inhibition states. Thus,
increases in the degree of coupling are associated with
decreases in HDR quality. This has not hitherto been used in
electrophysiology-based QoE assessment for HDR image
quality. This approach may provide an insight into human
preferences and perceptions about a service or product and
hence user-perceived quality. The specific objectives of the
paper are:
 To investigate changes in brain activities during
HDR image quality assessment.
 To understand the changes in the EEG which are
related to HDR image quality perception in terms of
QoE.
 To investigate the relationships between the
coupling between delta and beta activities and the
MOS.
We have used HDR imaging in the study as it has emerged as
one of the most promising recent developments in multimedia
technology and which has wide applications. 20 HDR images
which have been processed by four different TMOs (Tone-

Mapped Operators) were viewed by 28 subjects on small
screen devices (SSDs). The MOS scores were obtained and
the EEG data recorded during the test. The relationships
between MOS and EEG features were then investigated.
Results show that changes in the gamma and beta bands
correlated negatively with MOS, whereas positive
correlations were observed in the alpha band. The beta band
had the most significant association with (P > 0.001) MOS.
Analysis of the results showed that EEG-based measures
provided additional information in understanding human
perception of contents.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we describe the related work; in Section 3 details of
the data collection are provided. Section 4 presents the
analyses of the results of the subjective assessment and EEG
measures. Finally, conclusion and future work are presented
in Section 5.
2. RELATED WORK
2.1. Electroencephalography in HDR
There has not been much research regarding the evaluation of
HDR image quality using EEG measurements. Often, the
EEG is used in brain computer interface (BCI) applications,
where it assists users in image classification tasks [9].
Hayashi et al [9] used the EEG to evaluate the quality of high
resolution images, and found that images with good quality
produced a higher amount of alpha activity than images with
poor quality. Kroupi et al. [6] analysed the degradation of 2D
and 3D videos using sequences from a music festival. They
found that the EEG shows a high frontal asymmetry in the
alpha power band, reflecting emotional affect towards the
two different quality levels. Moon et al. [3] used four
different HDR and LDR (low dynamic range) video contents.
The power in the bands was extracted from the EEG data as
features and used for classification. This gave an accuracy of
almost 70% if only EEG features were used and almost 80%
if other peripheral measures were used for classification as
well. Moreover, gamma band gave the most discriminative
results between conditions. The above studies focused only
on one frequency band (e.g. alpha or gamma) and did not
investigate in detail the association between the bands or the
relationships with the QoE. Furthermore, previous studies all
used sophisticated, hospital-grade, EEG devices in the lab
environment which are not widely accessible for QoE
assessment purposes. Few research studies have explored the
potential of portable EEG devices for multimedia quality
assessment. Moldovan et al. [7] used features provided by the
Emotiv EPOC System to infer the level of frustration from
the human observer caused by the quality of audio-visual
excerpts. This level was based on a metric predefined by the
headset manufacturer for different levels of video quality.
The level of quality was controlled through changing the
bitrate, frame rate as well as the resolution of the presented
video clips. Perez et al. [10] used the Neuro-Sky Mind-Wave
headset to measure brain activity and used the recorded data
to classify the trials into high and low quality pictures. All the

above studies were focused on voice/video quality, but not on
HDR images.
2.2. Delta-beta coupling
Delta–beta coupling (positive correlation between power in
the fast beta and slow delta frequency bands) has been related
to affective processing [12-16]. For instance, differences in
delta–beta coupling have been observed between subjects in
a psychological stress condition and controls and have been
linked with negative behavioural characteristics (anxiety,
frustration, dissatisfaction). In Gray's theory [12], the authors
suggested that delta–beta coupling appear only in a
frustrating situation, that is, it should be state-dependent.
Another important point is that for anxiety generation, there
must be concurrent and equivalent activation of fear and
approach systems. In Knyazev et.al [13], it is shown that the
correlation between mid-frontal delta and beta spectral power
increased in healthy male subjects with an increase in anxiety
and behavioural inhibition. It has also been found that there
is higher positive correlation between delta and beta powers
in subjects with higher baseline level of salivary cortisol (the
steroid hormone directly associated with anxiety) [14]. A
hypothesis is that coupling reflects higher cortical arousal in
frustrating situations [15]. It has also been found that
coupling is very sensitive to external influences since it
allowed detection between good and bad performance
conditions [15].
3. DATA COLLECTION
In this study, explicit subjective tests and implicit tests using
the EEG were conducted. The study involved several
participants viewing and rating the quality of HDR images
with different TMOs while their EEG data were recorded at
the same time.
3.1. Participants
Twenty eight subjects including 13 female and 15 male
(Mean= 30.6, SD= 3.890, age range of 25- 45 years old), all
right-handed participated in the test. All subjects had normal
or corrected vision and are non-experts in HDR. However,
they all have a clear understanding of the test and are all
postgraduate students. Before each experiment, a training
session was given to allow participants to familiarize
themselves with the procedure. The images used in the
training session were different from the test stimuli. The
study protocol was approved by the Research Ethics
Committee at Plymouth University.
3.2. Tests Stimuli
Five HDR images were selected for the study, based on their
visual content, quality, and the dynamic range. The five
images were each processed by four TMOs, giving a total of
20 HDR images. The best four TMO from our previous study
were used [11] AL1: Adaptive Logarithmic; this is a fast
algorithm suitable for interactive applications which
automatically produces realistically looking images for a
wide variation of scenes exhibiting high dynamic range of

luminance. AL2: iCAM06; this is based on the physiology of
the human’s eye photo-receptors. The output of the operator
is a combination of a locally adapted value around each pixel
of the image and a globally adapted value based on the image
averages. AL3: Photographic Reproduction; this is based
upon dodging-and-burning in traditional photography. It
automatically applies various scales for luminance mapping
to the prorated regions of highlights and shadows. AL4:
Bilateral Filtering; this is fast bilateral filtering for the
display of HDR images conserving local details in the image.
The images used for the validation were computed using a
MATLAB® HDR toolbox. The default settings of the
operators' performance were used.
3.3. EEG signal acquisition
A portable EEG device (HeadCoach™, Alpha-Active Ltd,
Devon, UK) [8] was used to record scalp electrical activity,
with a sampling frequency 128 Hz, band-pass filter, 0.5-60
Hz, from two active (positive inputs) electrodes, placed at Fp1
and Fp2 according to the 10–20 EEG system [4]. Before the
electrode placement, the skin was prepared with an abrasive
skin preparation gel (Nuprep™, Weaver and Company,
Aurora, USA) and then cleaned with alcohol-free wipe. The
spectrum of the recorded is computed and the time and
frequency domain data were stored in CSV format for
subsequent analysis.

white cross on a grey background presented on the screen in
front of them. The EEG signals recorded during the baseline
period were used to remove stimulus-unrelated variations
from the signals acquired during the stimulus period. Once
the baseline period was over, an HDR image stimulus was
presented for 30 seconds. At the end of this, subjects were
asked to provide their ratings for the HDR image stimulus
within 60 seconds. After the participant has submitted the
rating, the next stimulus appears on the SSD, with the order
of sessions and trials randomised. The test sequences and
quality ratings were displayed on a web site. Subjects were
asked to evaluate the HDR stimuli (see Fig.2). We chose a
discrete five-level rating scale (ITU-R quality ratings [4]),
which is suitable for naïve observers (non-experts in image
processing) and is relatively easy for them to use it to quantify
quality (‘5=Excellent’ and ‘1=Bad’) [6]. Fig.3 illustrates an
example of a test trial including baseline, stimuli, and rating
period.
Pre-processing

Raw and
spectrum
EEG

HeadCoach

HDR images

Module

Online
Database

Ratings

SSD
HeadCoach
EEG device

Filtered EEG

Feature
extraction

Gamma, Beta, Alpha,
Theta, Delta

MOS

Delta-Beta
correlation

MOS for
each TMO

Compare
MOS for 4
TMOs

EEG-based QoE

Fig.2. the test-bed for HDR image quality assessment
3.6. Pre-processing

Fig.1. A participant preparation before the
experiment
3.4. Test Setup
The set-up for the test is illustrated in Fig.1. An iPhone 6
device running on IOS operating system was used to display
the HDR images. This has a 4.7-inch Retina HD display with
resolution of 1334×750. An Intel Core™ i7 PC running
Microsoft Windows 7 Enterprise operating system was used
to process the EEG data. The iPhone and the EEG recording
PC were time synchronized to facilitate the data analysis.
3.5. Test Methodology
The experiment consisted of two sessions. During each
session, 10 stimuli were displayed on the device. Half an hour
break was given between the two sessions to prevent lack of
attention and fatigue and to ensure comfort. Each session
lasted approximatively half an hour, excluding the training
and the setup of the EEG devices. Each trial consisted of a
30-second baseline phase, an HDR stimulus period and a
rating phase as shown in Fig.3. During the baseline period,
subjects were instructed to remain calm and to focus on a 2D

For EEG analysis, the MATLAB toolbox EEGLAB was
used. The recorded EEG signals was filtered using an IIR
filter to extract the frequency bands of interest between 0.560Hz. Thirty-three seconds of data were recorded for each
subject, but only the last 30 seconds of all signals were used
in our analysis, considering that stabilization and adaptation
to the HDR contents may take some time.

Fig.3 Trial timeline
3.7. Feature extraction
The baseline power was subtracted from the trial power,
yielding the change in power relative to the pre-stimulus
period. These changes in power were averaged over the
frequency bands, namely delta (0.5–4 Hz), theta (4–8 Hz),
alpha (8–13 Hz), band (13–30 Hz) and gamma (30–60 Hz)
frequency bands, for each channel. Delta activity is present
during sleep and continuous attention; theta activity occurs
during light sleep and provides an indicator for decreased
alertness and for encoding new information. Activity in the

alpha band is related to alertness and good quality images and
is a function of age. Beta activity is related to cognitive
thinking and visual attention and is significantly increased in
3D environment. Finally, gamma band is related to visual
information process, brain activity and good quality image
[9].
4. RESULTS DISCUSSION

brain maturity, theta synchronization is positively correlated
with the ability to encode new information [16]. From the
results, we can see that theta mean power amplitude is very
low (~10-5) compared with all other frequencies, which is an
indicator for increasing alertness [16].

4.1. Subjective rating analysis
In this section, the results of subjective rating are described
with the aim of providing an understanding of the
characteristics of QoE of tone mapped HDR images and
factors that affect QoE. The first step was to detect and
remove outliers in the subject MOS results so that they do not
influence the results. Outlier detection procedure was applied
to the results obtained from the 28 subjects and performed
according to the guidelines described in Section 2.3.1 of
Annex 2 of ITU-R BT.500-13 [5]. MOS representing the
average subjective quality ratings across all participants are
usually represented on nominal scales and associated 95%
Confidence Interval (CI) were presented for the four quality
levels algorithms as recommended in [5]. Fig.4 is the average
MOS for AL1, AL2, AL3 and AL4 respectively; Bilateral
Filtering AL4 had the best performance from the observers’
point of view.

(a) Gamma

(b)Beta

(c)Alpha

Fig.4. MOS and CIs for experienced TMOs
4.2. EEG signal analysis
It is known that high gamma power corresponds to high brain
activity and that the brain is highly activated when the
perceived quality is low. This indicates that perception of low
quality is related to negative emotions [2] [8] [10] [16]. It also
implies that higher gamma means lower quality for HDR
image (Fig.5.a). AL4 gave the lowest results, which indicates
that it has the highest quality. In accordance with [18-20], we
also found significantly higher beta for positive emotional
tasks (high perceived HDR quality in our case) compared to
other frequency bands results. Therefore, cognitive and
emotional processes seem to take place during quality
perception of HDR images. From the beta results, Fig.5.b,
there is no large variance in the mean power level. This
suggests that the brain reacted cognitively and emotionally
with the HDR images in the same way. Furthermore, high
alpha power indicates brain activation when overall
perceived quality is high, whereas alpha power in brain is
deactivation when overall perceived quality is low [3] [6] [910]. In Fig.4.c, AL4 gave the highest Alpha result, i.e. best
perceived quality. In the theta frequency band, Fig.4.d, EEG
power is negatively related to cognitive performance and

(d)Theta

(e) Delta
Fig.5. Mean power for (a) Delta (b) Theta (c) Alpha (d) Beta
and (e) Gamma
4.3. Correlation and Analysis of Variance
To estimate the correlation between changes in the EEG and
subjective scores, the mean of all power in the frequency
band across subjects were calculated. The Pearson linear
Correlation Coefficient was calculated between the mean
power values and the MOS for subjective ratings, per
frequency bands (see Table 1). From Table 1 we can see that
the highest correlation is between MOS and gamma
frequency band [2] [10], but this is negatively correlated;
Thus, higher gamma means lower quality for HDR image.
The AL4 TMO gave highest correlation.

The results also show that Alpha is positively correlated with
MOS and that AL4 gave the highest c The correlation values
for beta band, however, were not high but they followed the
hypothesized inverse relationship trend. This is probably
because the subject’s judgement may not always follow the
objective neurophysiological facts. Additionally, it is likely
due to neutrality of the content utilized for the HDR stimuli,
which may not have evoked strong enough emotional
characteristics [3] [6-7]. Theta and Delta correlate positively,
but the correlation is weak.
Table 1. Pearson correlation between MOS and the
frequency oscillations for each algorithm (quality)
Gamma
Beta
Alpha
Theta
Delta

AL1
-0.6605
-0.6005
0.5320
0.2648
0.0637

AL2
-0.8132
-0.6492
0.7523
0.2592
0.2211

AL3
-0.5660
-0.6012
0.5004
0.3336
0.0477

AL4
-0.8747
-0.6820
0.7830
-0.1039
0.0814

The Spearman correlations were estimated between the mean
powers values for each frequency band and the subjective
ratings, for all image contents (seeTable.2). We found
significantly higher beta in Night and Lighthouse compared
to Church, Warwick and office for positive emotional tasks
(preferred content in our case). Hence, cognitive and
emotional processes seem to take place during quality
perception of HDR image. An increase in alpha and theta
level is the result of a reduction in quality. This increase may
be due to an increased the level of anxiety, fatigue and
drowsiness [17-20]. We found significantly lower alpha and
theta in Night and Lighthouse compared to Church, Warwick
and Office. This finding implies that subjects in this study
rated perceived quality by taking into account how pleasant
or annoying the content was. Moreover, high gamma power
corresponds to high brain activity and suggesting that the
brain is highly activated when perceived quality is low [20].
Table 2. Pearson correlation between MOS and the
frequency oscillations for each content.
Gamm
a
Beta
Alpha
Theta
Delta

Churc
h

Warwic
k

Offic
e

Night

Lighthous
e

-0.7301

-0.7971

-0.808

-0.362

-0.4675

-0.5632

-0.4345
0.4155

0.4328

0.4774

0.1264

0.1109

-0.739
0.176
5
0.197
6
0.010
9

-0.8091

0.5857

-0.443
0.662
2
0.576
9
0.084
6

patterns during both cognitive and emotional information
processing.
To investigate quantitatively whether the HDR image quality
has a significant influence on the EEG frequency bands, an
ANOVA analysis was performed on the subjective ratings,
with a significance P-value threshold of 0.001. Table 3
summarizes the ANOVA results and beta gave a significant
P-value < 0.001. Overall, the results from the ANOVA
analysis revealed that beta has an impact on HDR perceived
quality. However, the other interactions were not significant,
P > 0.001. It has been established that beta band is highly
associated with cognition thinking, and reflects emotional
behaviour [16]. Our finding parallels that of Kroupi et al [6]
which found that beta frequency band significantly increased
in the 3D environment, which received a significantly higher
score in comparison to 2D video.
Table 3. ANOVA analysis
Source
Delta
Theta
Alpha
Beta
Gamma

dF
3
3
3
3
3

F
5.092
5.342
5.356
5.470
5.292

P-value
0.001668
0.001178
0.001155
0.000984
0.001263

4.4. The coupling measurments
To understand human behavioural states at the neural level,
the coupling between delta and beta frequency bands was
computed as the correlation coefficient between the mean
powers in the frequency bands. This is linked with negative
behavioural
characteristics
(anxiety,
frustration,
dissatisfaction). Clinical literature [12-15] indicates that
increased EEG delta-beta coupling promotes behavioural
inhibition states. This means that the closer the coupling (or
correlation) is to 0, the more the subject would be satisfied
with the test. On the other hand, as coupling or correlation
approaches 1, the less the subjects like the HDR image (or the
more frustrated they are frustrated by the test). By calculating
the coupling values between delta and beta for each tonemapped HDR image quality from the results, high coupling
values (e.g. greater than 0.5) would be considered to represent
unsatisfied subjects (or subjects who had an unpleasant
experience).

0.1144
0.1649
0.0116

We found significantly lower gamma in Night and Lighthouse
compared to Church, Warwick and office; this indicates that
low perception of quality is related to negative emotions.
Methodologically, our results indicate that Theta and Alpha
frequency bands offer a means of studying cortical activation

Fig.6. MOS and CIs for experienced TMOs after coupling

To explore this point, the scores for subjects who were
unsatisfied were removed (7 out of 28) from the dataset. Fig.6
shows the MOS for the four quality levels for the five
contents after removing those subjects. By comparing Fig.4
and Fig.6, we can see the MOS values per algorithm per
content have increased. On the other hand, the Standard

deviation and 95% confidence interval have decreased. The
results suggest that it is sometimes difficult for participants to
link the experienced quality to the quality scale in explicit
tests and that EEG-based measure provides additional and
complementary information which aids understanding of
human perception of contents.
5. CONCLUSION
This paper investigated the relationships between changes in
EEG features and a QoE metric (i.e. MOS) for HDR images.
20 HDR images were viewed by 28 subjects during informal
subjective tests and the subjects’ EEG data were also
recorded and subsequently processed. To investigate
quantitatively whether the HDR image quality has a
significant influence on the EEG frequency bands, an
ANOVA and Pearson correlation analysis were performed on
the subjective ratings. We found that gamma, beta, and delta
frequency bands gave the most discriminative correlation
with MOS. Moreover, from the ANOVA results, beta band
gave a significant p-value < 0.001. Overall, the results from
the ANOVA analysis revealed that changes in the beta had an
impact on HDR perceived quality. The present results
indicate
that
induced
emotions
have
visible
electrophysiological correlates with the content. Emotional
activation paradigms in association with electrophysiological
measures represent a fruitful experimental avenue for future
research in illustrating the biological correlates of emotions.
In future, we will increase dataset used and investigate further
the role of the delta- beta coupling coefficient in quality
assessment and its implications for QoE assessment.
6. REFERENCES
[1] M. Narwaria, et.al. “High dynamic range visual quality
of experience measurement: Challenges and
perspectives”, Visual Signal Quality Assessment,
Springer International Publishing, pp. 129-155, 2015
[2] M.Melo, M. Bessa, K. Debattista and A.Chalmers,
“Evaluation of HDR video tone mapping for mobile
devices. Signal Processing: Image Communication, 29,
2 (February 2014), 247–256
[3] S.E. Moon and J.S. Lee. “Perceptual experience analysis
for tone-mapped
HDR videos based on EEG and
peripheral physiological signals”. IEEE Transactions on
Autonomous Mental Development, 7(3), pp.236-247.
2015
[4] A. H. Al-nuaimi, E. Jammeh, L. Sun and E. Ifeachor,
"Changes in the EEG amplitude as a biomarker for early
detection of Alzheimer's disease," 2016 38th Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Orlando, FL,
2016, pp. 993-996, EMBC.2016
[5] ITU, Methodology for the subjective assessment of the
quality of television pictures, Recommendation BT.50013 2010.
[6] E. Kroupi, P. Hanhart, J.S. Lee, M. Rerabek and T.
Ebrahimi.”, September. EEG correlates during video

quality perception”. In 2014 22nd European Signal
Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2014.
[7] A.-N. Moldovan, I. Ghergulescu, S. Weibelzahl, and
C.H. Muntean, “User-centered EEG-based Multimedia
Quality Assessment,” in Proc. International Symposium
on Broadband Multimedia Systems Broadcasting, 2013.
[8] Alpha-Active
Ltd.
[Online].
Available.
http://www.alpha-active.com/
[9] S. Arndt et.al.” Review on using physiology in quality of
experience. Electronic Imaging”, 2016(16), pp.1-9.
[10] J. Perez and E. Del´echelle, “On the measurement of
image quality perception using frontal EEG analysis,” in
International Conference on Smart Communications in
Network Technologies, 2013
[11] Sh.Al-juboori, I.Makwawa, L.Sun and E.Ifeachor.”
Impact of Tone-mapping Operators and Viewing
Devices on Visual Quality of Experience” in proceeding
of IEEE ICC 2016.
[12] J.A. Gray, N. McNaughton,” The Neuropsychology of
Anxiety: An Enquiry into the Functions of the SeptoHippocampal System” (2nd ed.)Oxford University
Press, Oxford, 2000
[13] G.G. Knyazev, A.N. Savostyanov, E.A Levin.” Alpha
oscillations as a correlate of trait anxiety”. Int. J.
Psychophysiol. 53, 147–160. 2004
[14] D.J.L.G. Schutter and J.V. Honk, “Salivary cortisol
levels and the coupling of midfrontal delta–beta
oscillations,” Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 55, pp. 127129,
2005.
[15] G.G. Knyazev, D.J.L.G. Schutter, and J. V. Honk,
“Anxious apprehension increases coupling of delta and
beta
oscillations,”
International
Journal
of
Psychophysiology, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 283 – 287, 2006.
[16] R. Gupta, et.al. ”Objective characterization of human
behavioural characteristics for QoE assessment: A pilot
study on the use of electroencephalography features”. In
2013 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps) (pp.
1168-1173). IEEE.2013.
[17] W. J. Ray and H. W. Cole, “EEG alpha activity reflects
attentional demands, and beta activity reflects emotional
and cognitive processes,” Science, vol. 228, no. 4700,
pp. 750–752, 1985.
[18] W. Klimesch, “Alpha-band oscillations, attention, and
controlled access to stored information”. Trends in
cognitive sciences. 2012 Dec 31;16 (12):606-17.
[19] N.Rowland, MJ. Meile, S. Nicolaidis,” EEG alpha
activity reflects attentional demands, and beta activity
reflects emotional and cognitive processes”. Science.
1985; 228 (4700):750-2.
[20] MM. Müller, A. Keil, T. Gruber, T. Elbert “Processing
of affective pictures modulates right-hemispheric
gamma band EEG activity”. Clinical Neurophysiology.
1999 Nov 1; 110 (11):1913-20.

