INDEX
KEYNOTE LECTURES ...................................................................................................................... 2
THEME 1 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME I ........................................... 2
THEME 2 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME II .......................................... 3
THEME 3 PHYSIOLOGY OF STRESS ............................................................................................. 4
THEME 4 BY WAY OF THE SKIN ................................................................................................. 5
THEME 5 PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORMATICS.................................................................................. 6
PODIUM PRESENTATIONS ............................................................................................................ 8
THEME 1 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME I ........................................... 8
THEME 2 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME II ........................................ 10
THEME 3 PHYSIOLOGY OF STRESS ........................................................................................... 14
THEME 4 BY WAY OF THE SKIN ............................................................................................... 17
THEME 5 PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORMATICS................................................................................ 20
POSTERS ...................................................................................................................................... 24
THEMES 1 & 2 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME................................... 24
THEME 3 PHYSIOLOGY OF STRESS ........................................................................................... 29
THEME 4 BY WAY OF THE SKIN ............................................................................................... 32
THEME 5 PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORMATICS................................................................................ 37
AUTHORS’ INDEX ........................................................................................................................ 42

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.1

KEYNOTE LECTURES
THEME 1 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME I
CENTENARIANS: AN EXAMPLE OF SUCCESSFUL PHYSIOLOGICAL ADAPTATION TO
AGEING
Jose Vina and Consuelo Borras; Freshage Research Group
Dept. Physiology. Fac.of Medicine, University of Valencia, Av. de Blasco Ibáñez 1546010 Valencia. Spain
Centenarians constitute an example of extraordinary ageing, not only because they reach
extreme long age, but also because they enjoy an extraordinary healthspan that includes a
remarkable compression of morbidity towards the end of their life.
One of the critical physiological features of ageing is that old individuals lose their capacity to
maintain homeostasis, i.e. to resist the stresses of normal life. Centenarians, however, do
maintain the efficient homeostatic mechanisms well into advanced age.
Centenarians usually belong to families blessed with many members who have enjoyed
extraordinary ageing and made it to be a hundred or over. The proportion of centenarians is rising
from one in 8,000 to approximately now 1 in 5,000 individuals in advanced societies like those in
the Iberian Peninsula.
With the idea of extraordinary homeostasis in mind, we analysed the expression of miRNAs (the
regulatory forms of small RNA whose main characteristic is that of controlling the expression of
transcription). We observed that the expression of mRNAs in centenarians remains similar to that
of young and very different from that of old individuals and that this may be due to a remarkable
capacity of synthesis of mRNAs (catalysed by Drosha, Dicer, and exportin). We first analysed
the mRNome of centenarians by analysing and by using big data analysis, we identified four
genes that are specially upregulated in centenarians. These are BcL-XL, FAS, FAS ligand, and
CCL5. Three of these genes are associated with the control of apoptosis. The general idea being
that centenarians are able to downplay the activity of intrinsic apoptosis and activate the extreme
pathway for apoptosis.
Finally, we have studied families of centenarians and found that descendants of centenarians are
less frail than individuals of the same age but without the genetic background of centenarians and
that the RNA expression profile of centenarian descendants is similar to that of centenarians and
different from that of individuals whose parents were not centenarians.
The physiological implications of this remarkable genetic background will be discussed.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.2

Professor Jose Viña is Full Professor in the Department of Physiology (University of Valencia,
Spain) and has been working in ageing for over thirty years. He has been leading a successful
research group dealing with nutritional aspects, in the first instance, with longevity and, more
recently, with frailty and Alzheimer’s disease. His major contributions have been: i) Experimental
determination that mitochondria are key targets for ageing; ii) Identification of molecular
mechanisms to explain why females live longer than males; iii) Identification of new longevityassociated genes, particularly those involved in p53 pathways, telomerase, RAS/GRF1, and
antioxidants (G6PD); iv) Generation of a new experimental model for frailty in animals, and; v)
Identification of biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease and frailty.

THEME 2 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME II
CHRONOBIOLOGY – THE IMPORTANCE OF TIMING
Debra J. Skene
Chronobiology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
Biological clocks are essential for the co-ordination of physiology and behaviour. Circadian clocks
are endogenous autonomous oscillators conferring a near 24-h circadian rhythm on multiple
processes from gene expression to behaviour. The circadian timing system consists of a central
oscillator in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) that drives timing in multiple tissue
specific clocks in the periphery (e.g., liver, pancreas, adipose tissue). This permits synchrony
between different internal rhythms (e.g., metabolic and cardiovascular systems). Clocks regulate
most physiological processes (e.g., cell cycle, immune function, sleep/wake regulation,
metabolism, cardiovascular function). This has implications for time of day sampling, disease
diagnosis (biomarker discovery), and therapeutics.
Biological clocks evolved to anticipate and adjust appropriately to environmental events, e.g.,
dawn/dusk, seasons, and tides. The 24 h light/dark cycle is the primary time cue entraining the
SCN-clock to the 24 h day, in addition to light acutely affecting many aspects of physiology and
behaviour. The advent of electricity, artificial lighting, and light-emitting electronic devices has
impacted on human circadian timing and sleep/wake patterns. For example, light at night,
depending on the light intensity, duration and spectral composition, is capable of delaying the
timing of sleep and circadian rhythms resulting in, inter alia, reduced sleep duration.
Modern life with rapid travel across time zones or working rotating shifts causes a mismatch
between the circadian timing system and the sleep/wake, feeding/fasting cycle with adverse
health consequences. For example, shift workers have an increased risk of cancer and metabolic
disease. The biochemical mechanisms underlying sleep deprivation, circadian misalignment, and
disease are currently the subject of intensive study. Additional challenges include how best to
minimise circadian disruption, ensuring good sleep, maintaining wakefulness/good performance
during waking hours, and minimising metabolic disturbance. Optimising photic and nonphotic time
cues (e.g., meals, melatonin) to synchronize/reset disturbed circadian rhythms offers promise.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.3

Debra J. Skene, Ph.D., is Professor of Neuroendocrinology (2001- ) and Section Lead for
Chronobiology at the University of Surrey, UK. Educated in South Africa (B.Pharm, MSc, Ph.D.),
she joined the University of Surrey in 1984. She has over 25 years of research experience
studying the human circadian timing system and has authored over 150 refereed research
publications. Her recent research has been funded by the EU FP6 and FP7 programmes, UK
Cross Research Council New Dynamics of Ageing (NDA) Programme, the BBSRC and MRC
(UK). She is also a past Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award Holder.
Professor Skene and her team's research is directed towards characterisation and treatment of
circadian rhythm sleep/wake disorders as experienced by blind people, shift workers and older
people. Her team’s findings have led to the optimisation of melatonin (dose, time of administration)
and light (wavelength, time of administration) to affect human circadian timing. Currently her
research team is studying the links between human circadian clocks, sleep and metabolism in
health, circadian rhythm disorders and metabolic diseases (shift workers, Type 2 diabetes, liver
disease) using LC-MS metabolomics.
Professor Skene is President of the European Biological Rhythms Society (EBRS) (2015- ) and
past Vice-President (Basic) of the European Sleep Research Society (ESRS) (2010-2014). She
is a past Chair of a Gordon Research Conference (Pineal Cell Biology, 2012), currently an
Associate Editor of the Journal of Sleep Research and on the Editorial Board of Chronobiology
International.

THEME 3 PHYSIOLOGY OF STRESS
NITRIC OXIDE SIGNALING IN THE BRAIN: TRANSLATION OF DYNAMICS INTO
RESPIRATION CONTROL AND NEUROVASCULAR COUPLING
João Laranjinha
Faculty of Pharmacy and Center for Neurosciences and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra,
Portugal
In a couple of decades, following its identification in the biological milieu, nitric oxide (NO),
previously known as an atmospheric pollutant, emerged as a ubiquitous messenger in the
cardiovascular and central nervous systems. The analysis of its peculiar physico-chemical
properties provides a platform for an integrative and comprehensive understand of the diversity
of biological functions in which NO acts as a core mediator. We will address the key physicochemical properties of NO and how these can be translated in the regulation of cell functions and
in the maintenance of homeostasis. In particular, we will address the critical role of NO in the
regulation of two physiologic pathways: mitochondrial cellular respiration and the mediation of the
neurovascular-neurometabolic axis in the brain. It will be apparent that NO emerged as a central
regulator of neurometabolism with consequences for aging and neurodegeneration.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.4

Acknowledgments: This work was financed by the European Regional Development Fund
(FEDER) funds through the Operational Program for Competitiveness and Internationalization COMPETE and national funds by FCT - Foundation for Science and Technology under the project
POCI-01-0145-FEDER-029099 and through the Centro 2020 Regional Operational Program,
under the project CENTRO-01-0145-FEDER-000012-HealthyAging2020.
João Laranjinha graduated with a degree in Pharmaceutical Sciences (University of Coimbra) in
1984 and a Ph.D. in Biochemistry (University of Coimbra) in 1996. His postdoc studies were made
with Enrique Cadenas in 1997-1998 in the Dept. of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology,
University Southern California, Los Angeles, USA.
His research is focused on the functional impact of nitric oxide in the brain as a neurometabolic
regulator and as a mediator of neurovascular coupling with impact in aging and
neurodegeneration. He is also interested in dietary nitrite-driven regulatory processes,
encompassing the non-enzymatic production of nitric oxide along the nitrate:nitrite:NO pathway.
He has published 90+ papers ISI with 2500+ citations.
He has chaired the organizing and scientific committees of several international conferences,
including the European (SFRRE 2007) and International (SFRRI 2018) meetings of the Society
for Free Radical Research. He is a member of the editorial board of several prestigious journals
in his area of research (Free Radical Research, Free Radical Biology and Medicine, Biofactors
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics and Redox Biology) and of the Advisory Board of
Oxygen Club of California from which he has received the Science and Humanity Award at the
University of California, Davies, US, in 2016. He has been a member of the Council of the
European Society for Neurochemistry and the European Society for Free Radical Research for
several years and President of the Portuguese Biochemical Society (2014-18). Currently, he
serves as member of the Advanced Courses Committee of FEBS and as the president of the
General Assembly of the Portuguese Biochemical Society.

THEME 4 BY WAY OF THE SKIN
BY WAY OF THE SKIN
Joachim W. Fluhr
Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany
The skin is the interface of the human body to the potentially harmful environment with exogenous
stressors like chemicals, UV radiation and other physical stimuli. The epidermal barrier is
recognized as a central key pathophysiologic element in inflammatory skin diseases such as
atopic dermatitis (AD). Some bases of an impaired barrier have been elucidated on the molecular
level e.g. mutation in genes encoding for filaggrin and lipid processing defects. Change in the
microbiome composition and its relation to altered barrier function have been reported. The

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.5

epidermal barrier is also of interest for penetration of both irritants and allergens as well as
topically applied drugs and active ingredients.
Multiple non-invasive biophysical measurement instruments are used to assess skin physiology
e.g. in inflammatory skin diseases associated with an altered epidermal barrier, namely
transepidermal water loss, stratum corneum hydration, surface pH, inflammatory signs and
surface parameters. More sophisticated non-invasive or minimally invasive devices to assess skin
physiology have been introduced over the last decade: multidimensional imaging, in vivo
multiphoton spectroscopy, optical coherence tomography, atomic force microscopy, near-infrared
spectroscopy (NIR), in vivo Raman micro-spectroscopy and in vivo reflectance Raman
spectroscopy.
Atopic dermatitis is a prototype of translational research at the interface of epidermal barrier and
inflammation. Non- or minimal-invasive methods have been used in different AD research areas.
The combination of established approaches with cutting edge methods allowed to gain a deeper
understanding of barrier related inflammatory skin diseases.
Molecular mechanisms and their modulation are classically studied in vitro (e.g. in cell culture
models) or using invasive biopsy techniques. Recently non- or minimally-invasive methods have
been introduced in different cutaneous research areas. These methods include multidimensional
imaging, optical coherence tomography, atomic force microscopy and in vivo Raman MicroSpectroscopy. Age-specific patterns and changes over life span have been elaborated.
An example of age-specific skin physiology will be presented for neonates and children. Their
epidermis is physiologically and morphologically different from adult skins e.g. in water content,
light sensibility, corneocyte size, percutaneous permeability, susceptibility to infections/irritants
and topical treatments. The postnatal period is a time of active functional maturation and
cutaneous adaptation to the dry, eventually harsh extra-uterine environment. Recent research
focused on the development of functional aspects and the micro-morphological skin surface
evolution of epidermal barrier e.g. with the development of the E.M.I. (Electron Microscopy
Isotropy) score. Skin maturation takes approximately two years. Infant skin showed thinner
epidermis and thinner stratum corneum (SC) as well as smaller corneocytes. The Stratum
cohesion is a key factor in SC maturation and depends on the presence, subcellular distribution
and timely coordinated degradation of the intercellular junctions.
The lecture will give an overview on established as well as new technologies to study the skin
physiology under different conditions and in selected skin diseases.

THEME 5 PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORMATICS
PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORMATICS

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.6

Hugo Silva
IT-IST, Universidade de Lisboa
Physiological data has had a transforming role on multiple aspects of society, which goes beyond
the health sciences domains to which they were traditionally associated with. This has been made
possible through technological advances in electronics, telecommunications and informatics.
Today, most people carry small pocket or wrist-worn computers, collecting a plethora of data in
always on / always connected paradigm. Combined with recent advances in signal processing
and machine learning, physiological data is increasingly being used in a plethora of novel areas
such as human-computer interaction, entertainment, architecture, and many others.
BITalino has been revolutionising biomedical education and prototyping by providing versatile
toolkits composed of low-cost hardware and software, created to enable anyone to create cool
projects and applications involving physiological data. The hardware consists of modular wireless
biosignal acquisition systems that can be used to acquire data in real time, interface with other
devices (e.g. Arduino or Raspberry PI), or perform rapid prototyping of end-user applications. The
software comprehends a set of programming APIs, a biosignal processing toolbox, and a
framework for real time data acquisition and post processing. In this talk we will review how
BITalino came to be and the future prospects.
Physiological data from wearable sensors and smartphone are accumulating rapidly, and this
provides us the chance to collect dynamic and personalized information as phenotype to be
integrated to genotype for the holistic understanding of complex diseases. This integration can
be applied to early prediction and prevention of disease, therefore promoting the shifting of
disease care tradition to the healthcare paradigm. In this chapter, we summarize the physiological
signals which can be detected by wearable sensors, the sharing of the physiological big data, and
the mining methods for the discovery of disease-associated patterns for personalized diagnosis
and treatment. We discuss the challenges of physiological informatics about the storage, the
standardization, the analyses, and the applications of the physiological data from the wearable
sensors and smartphone. At last, we present our perspectives on the models for disentangling
the complex relationship between early disease prediction and the mining of physiological
phenotype data.
Hugo received his Ph.D. in Electrical and Computer Engineering from the Instituto Superior
Técnico (IST) – University of Lisbon. Since 2004 Hugo has been a researcher at the IT - Instituto
de Telecomunicações (http://www.it.pt/person_detail_p.asp?id=1293) and a Professor at
EST/IPS – Polytechnic Institute of Setúbal (http://www.estsetubal.ips.pt/) since 2016. In 2012 he
was a visiting researcher at the Computational and NeuroEngineering Laboratory (CNEL) at the
University of Florida. He is co-founder of PLUX – Wireless Biosignals (http://www.plux.info),
established in 2007 as an innovative technology-based company operating in the field of medical
devices for healthcare and quality of life, where he is currently Chief Innovation Officer.
More recently, Hugo has been actively working towards making the world a bit more physiological,
through BITalino (http://www.bitalino.com), an open source software and low-cost hardware
toolkit that allows anyone from students to professional app developers to create cool projects

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.7

and applications with physiological sensors.
His main interest interests include biosignal research, system engineering, signal processing, and
pattern recognition, and his work has been distinguished with several academic and technical
awards such as the “Career Award alumniIPS” in 2018 (awarded by the Polytechnic Institute of
Setúbal to former students), the “Best Industrial and Enabling Technology” at the European
Commission’s DG-CONNECT Innovation Radar Prize in 2017 with the project “BITalino”, the 1st
place at the Ordem dos Engenheiros Young Engineer Innovation Award in 2015 with the project
“BIT: Biosignal Igniter Toolkit”, the 1st place at the Venture Day Lisbon in 2013 with the project
“Vitalidi: Your Heart (h)as a Key!”, the selection as a semi-finalist to the Engadget Expand NY
Insert Coin competition in 2013, the Life Sciences Award in 2010 at a yearly venture competition
co-promoted by the MIT, and the "Caixa Geral de Depósitos Award'' from 2003 to 2005 for
recognized academic merit.

PODIUM PRESENTATIONS
THEME 1 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME I
1.1 PUPIL SIZE DURING AUTHENTICITY RECOGNITION IN LAUGHTER AND CRYING
Gonçalo Cosme1; Mónica Costa2; Vânia Tavares1; Katja Brodmann3; César Lima4; Pedro
Rosa4; Diana Prata1
1 - Instituto de Biofísica e Engenharia Biomédica; 2 - Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade
de Lisboa; 3 - Department of Neuroimaging, King's College London; 4 - Centro de Investigação
e Intervenção Social, Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), CIS-IUL
Emotions play an important role in social interactions however some neurological pathologies
manifest themselves with dysfunctional emotional recognition and/or expression, strongly
motivating research on these emotional processes. Nonverbal emotional vocalizations are
expressions of emotions without semantic context, can be characterized according to their
category (e.g., amusement, sadness, and fear), valence (positive or negative), arousal and
authenticity (whether spontaneous or voluntary). The ability to correctly recognize authenticity is
an advantageous social skill that enhances group cohesion, affiliation and cooperation. Recent
studies suggest that spontaneous emotions elicit different brain activation patterns compared to
voluntary emotions mostly because perceivers require less mentalization (i.e. cognitive effort) to

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.8

recognize spontaneous emotions; and that spontaneous vocalizations were more arousing than
voluntary.
In this work, pupil size, a well-known measure of cognitive effort and arousal, was measured
during displays of nonverbal emotional vocalizations of amusement (laughter) and sadness
(crying) modulated for their authenticity (spontaneous or voluntary). After sound display, 38
participants rated the sounds on their perceived authenticity in a Likert scale (1-7). Group analysis
demonstrated a statistically significant main effect of valence on mean pupil size at 1 sec. of
sound display; and of authenticity at 3 sec. of sound display.
These results suggest that authenticity processing manifests physiologically later than other
emotion recognition processes such as valence recognition. Furthermore, they consolidate pupil
size as a neurophysiological measurement by demonstrating it is sufficiently sensitive to more
complex social processes as is authenticity rating in nonverbal emotional vocalizations.
Keywords: Pupillometry, Emotional Authenticity, Voice Processing, Emotional Arousal
Presenting author profile
Gonçalo Cosme is a biomedical engineer and researcher in Diana Prata’s team, mainly
responsible for electrophysiological equipment handling and currently researching on social
cognition. He is a proven researcher with one published peer-reviewed scientific publication
reviewing GWAS studies of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and another submitted which
studied emotion recognition across cultures. Currently analyzing pupillometry data collected in
two separate studies, he was an invited speaker for the 3rd Encontro Nacional de Oculometria
Cognitiva in ULHT and a speaker for the Methods and Research on Gaze Tracking workshop
held in IST.

1.2. THE LEVELS OF OSTEOCALCIN IN OBESE AND NON-OBESE HEALTHY SEDENTARY
MEN AND IT IS RELATION WITH ADIPOMYOKINES
Sema Sayharman1; Muaz Belviranlı1; Nilsel Okudan1
1 - Department of Physiology Faculty of Medicine Selcuk University Konya Turkey
The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of obesity on osteocalcin, irisin, and lipid profiles
in healthy sedentary men and the possible relationship between these parameters.
A total of 28 (14 normal and 14 obese) sedentary and health men aged between 20-30 were
included in the study. Participants were divided into two groups as normal weight sedentary men
(n = 14) and sedentary men (n = 14) in the class I obesity range, according to height, weight and
body fat percentage. Lipid profile levels were measured in addition to the levels of osteocalcin
and irisin in the blood taken from the participants. Weight, height, basal metabolic rate, body mass
index and body fat percentage were measured by body analysis. The data obtained from the
study were analyzed by comparing these two groups.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.9

In our study, osteocalcin and irisin levels were higher in the non-obese group compared to the
obese group (p <0.05).
Keywords: Irisin, osteocalcin, obesity

1.4. MICROCIRCULATORY CHARACTERISATION OF THE MARCH IN PLACE ACTIVITY
Margarida Florindo1; L. Monteiro Rodrigues2
1 - Portuguese Red Cross Health School, ESSCVP – Lisboa; 2 – CBIOS, Lisboa, Portugal
Peripheral vascular dysfunction already represents the 3rd major cause of cerebral stroke, closely
related to sedentary habits. However, simple exercises might act as active preventers especially
in populations with mobility impairments due to their age or other limiting conditions. Our study
aims to evaluate the potential impact of the march in place activity on the inferior limb
microcirculation. Eleven healthy volunteers (25.6 ± 5.4 y.o.) both sexes, normal ankle-brachial
index (1.08 ± 0.15) participated in the study after IWC. The protocol involved one minute in the
standing position (Phase 1); one minute of marching in place (Phase 2) and one minute of
recovery (Phase 3) again standing. Local perfusion was quantified by Photoplethysmography
(PPG) and by subsurface polarisation light spectroscopy (Tissue Viability Imaging® system) by
the local concentration of red blood cells (CRBC). Probes were placed as close as possible to
each other, from 1 cm anterointernal region of the first metatarsus head. Descriptive and
comparative statistics were applied and a 95% level of confidence adopted. Group’s mean
comparison between phases have shown significant differences in Phase 2 were for CBRC, not
observed in Phase 3. PPG and PR have shown significant increase in Phase 3 (p = 0.016 and p
= 0.005 respectively). Sex related differences for PPG and CBRC were not detected in Phase 1,
but significant differences were found for CBRC in Phases 2 and 3 (p = 0.011 and p = 0.006
respectively) with higher values in men. In conclusion, the march in place activity seems to
positively impact the inferior limb microcirculation, even on normal healthy individuals, suggesting
an interesting potential in rehabilitation.
Keywords: March in place, microcirculation, PPG, TiVi, lower limb
Presenting author profile
Physiotherapist since 1984, specialized in the area of neuromuscular conditions, with clinical
practice to date. She is teaching as an assistant professor at ESSCVP-Lisboa where she also
works as a Department Director. She is a Ph.D. student at the School of Health Sciences and
Technologies of Lusófona University and researcher at CBIOS - Research Center for Biosciences
& Health Technologies.

THEME 2 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME II

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.10

2.1. FREQUENT CONSUMPTION OF ARTIFICIALLY SWEETENED BEVERAGES IS
ASSOCIATED WITH AN INCREASED RISK OF METABOLIC SYNDROME IN A
MEDITERRANEAN POPULATION AT HIGH CVD RISK
Cíntia Ferreira-Pêgo1,2,15,16; Nancy Babio1,2; Maira Bes-Rastrollo2,3,4; Dolores Corella2,5; Ramon
Estruch6,7; Emilio Ros2,8; Montserrat Fitó2,9; Luis Serra-Majem2,6,9; Fernando Arós6,10; Miguel
Fiol2,11; José Manuel Santos-Lozano2,12; Carlos Muñoz-Bravo13; Xavier Pintó8,14; Miguel RuizCanela2,3,4; Jordi Salas-Salvadó1,2,6
1 - Human Nutrition Unit, Hospital Universitari de Sant Joan de Reus, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, IISPV (Institut d’Investigació Sanitària Pere Virgili), Biochemistry Biotechnology
Department, Universitat Rovira i Virgili. C/ Sant Llorenç, 21, 43201 Reus, Spain; 2 - CIBERobn
(Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición), Institute
of Health Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; 3 - Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health,
School of Medicine, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; 4 - IDISNA, Navarra’s Health
Research Institute, Pamplona, Spain; 5 - Department of Preventive Medicine, University of
Valencia, Valencia, Spain; 6 - Prevention with Mediterranean Diet Research Network
(PREDIMED), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; 7 - Department of Internal Medicine,
Institute of Biomedical Research August Pi Sunyer, Clinic Hospital, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain; 8 - Department of Lipid Clinic, Endocrinology and Nutrition Service, Institute of
Biomedical Research August Pi Sunyer, Clinic Hospital, University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain; 9 - Cardiovascular Risk and Nutrition Research Group, Medical Research Institute of Del
Mar Hospital, Barcelona Biomedical Research Park, Barcelona, Spain; 10 - Department of
Cardiology, University Hospital Araba, Vitoria, Spain; 11 - Palma Institute of Health Research.
Hospital Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain; 12 - Department of Family Medicine, Distrito
Sanitario Atención Primaria Sevilla, Centro de Salud San Pablo, Sevilla, Spain; 13 - Department
of Public Health and Psychiatry, University of Málaga, Málaga, Spain; 14 - Lipids and Vascular
Risk Unit, Internal Medicine Service, University Hospital of Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain; 15 CBIOS Lusófona's Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies, Av. Campo
Grande 376, 1749-024 Lisbon, Portugal.; 16 - School of Sciences and Health Technologies,
Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, Portugal
This analysis evaluated the associations between intakes of artificially sweetened beverages
(ASB) and the incidence of Metabolic Syndrome (MetS) in elderly individuals at high risk of
cardiovascular disease and without MetS at baseline. We prospectively examined 1868
participants from the PREDIMED study. Energy and nutrients were evaluated at baseline and
yearly using a validated 137-item food frequency questionnaire. Multivariable-adjusted HRs for
MetS and its components were estimated from the mean intake during follow-up. We compared
the two highest consumption categories (1-5 servings/week, and >5 servings/week) with the
lowest category (<1 serving/week). A total of 930 incident cases of MetS were documented during
a median follow-up of 3.24 years. When comparing the consumption of >5 servings/week with <1
serving/week, multivariable hazard ratios (95% CI) for MetS incidence were 1.74 (1.26-2.41) in
case of ASB. As a conclusion, the occasional consumption of ASB (between 1 and 5
servings/week) was not associated with overall MetS. However, the consumptions of more than

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.11

5 servings/week of this type of beverage were associated with an increased risk of MetS and
some of its components, such as abdominal obesity and hypertriglyceridemia. To date, it has
been suggested that three mechanisms may explain these associations: 1) artificial sweeteners
can interfere with learned responses that help to control glucose and energy homeostasis; 2)
artificial sweeteners interact with sweet-taste receptors that are expressed throughout the
digestive system and which may play a role in glucose absorption and trigger insulin secretion;
and 3) artificial sweeteners (such as saccharin, sucralose or aspartame) can interfere with gut
microbiota, thus decreasing glucose sensitivity and favoring MetS development.
Keywords: Artificially-sweetened beverages, Metabolic Syndrome, Metabolic Syndrome
Components, PREDIMED study
Presenting author profile
She graduated in Human Nutrition and Dietetics in Universitat Rovira i Virgili, and has a Master’s
Degree in Training and Sports Nutrition from the Universidad Europea de Madrid. She obtained
his Ph.D. with International Mention in Nutrition and Metabolism from the Universitat Rovira i Virgili
and University of Arkansas. Her main epidemiological research interests are the Mediterranean
Diet, dairy products, hydration, and/or the consumption of beverages and its relation with health
and disease.

2.2. THE SHORT DURATION MASSAGE OF A SINGLE LIMB IN HUMAN ALTERS
CARDIOVASCULAR DYNAMICS IN BOTH LIMBS
Clemente Rocha1; Henrique Silva1,2; Hugo Ferreira3; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1,2
1 - 1 Universidade Lusófona CBIOS - Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies,
Av Campo Grande, 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - 2 Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc Depart - Lisboa, Portugal; 3 - 3 Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of
Sciences – IBEB Institute for Biophysics and Biomedical Engineering
Effleurage is surely one of the most popular massage techniques used for multiple purposes. Its
physiological impact and mechanisms are still poorly understood, and sometimes inconclusive.
We aim to characterize the cardiovascular impact of this technique on human in vivo
microcirculation. To this end, distal blood perfusion was non-invasively quantified with both laser
Doppler flowmetry (LDF) and photoplethysmography (PPG), in both feet. The massage protocol
involved the application of two techniques, proximal and distal, randomly sequenced with a 15
min washout between them. 32 young healthy volunteers (mean 19.81 ± 1.55 yo) both sexes,
were after informed written consent. The experimental selected a random limb for massage with
the contralateral acting as control. Each protocol included a 10 minute baseline (Phase I) period,
a 5 minute massage (Phase II), and a 10 minute recovery (Phase III) recordings with LDF and
PPG. Blood pressure and pulse rate were also evaluated. LDF signals were decomposed in its
oscillatory components with the (Morlet) WT. Results showed that massage promoted a
significant perfusion increase during massage in both test and contralateral limbs. No significant
differences between techniques and no sex related differences regarding response to massage

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.12

were identified. Detailed analysis of the LDF oscillatory components suggests that these
procedures, significantly modify multiple components of cardiovascular integration, with cardiac,
respiratory, myogenic and endothelial components playing a major role in distal microcirculatory
homeostasis.
Keywords: Effleurage, cardiovascular effects, LDF, PPG, wavelet transform
Presenting author profile
Degree in Computer Engineering from ISPGAYA and MSc in Computer Engineering (ISCTEIUL). Has dedicated an important part of his activity to Naturopathy (General Course of
Naturopathy and Holistic Traditional Sciences - IMT). Current Ph.D. student in the doctoral
program in Health Sciences at U Lusófona where he concluded an advanced training in Clinical
Trials.

2.3. TRENDS SHAPING THE FUTURE OF PHYSIOLOGY TEACHING AND PRACTICE:
FINDINGS FROM A FOCUS GROUP FROM PMIG (THE PHYSIOLOGY MAJORS INTEREST
GROUP) EXPERTS
Joao Gregorio1; Erica Wehrwein2; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1
1 - CBIOS - Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies; 2 - Dept of Physiology,
Michigan State University
The future of Physiology as a critical domain in health and medicine is a crucial debate theme
among experts. Various constraints modified teaching, while the status of Physiology in research
has also been altered.
Our main goal was to identify the major trends that may shape physiology’s future as a teaching
and research domain in a 2030 horizon.
A focus group was hosted during the PMIG 2019 meeting, joining experienced physiologists,
mostly from the US. An interview guide was developed following a literature review and applied
to the volunteered participants.
These physiologists described physiology as a discipline with soft borders, easily permeable to
the influence of other disciplines, and likewise influencing them.
It was noted how technology is changing the teacher-student relationship. E-learning/b-learning
are no longer novelties and are seen as a good complement to classroom/laboratory work. The
use of simulators was seen as very valuable, even if they remain “a black box”. Collaboration with
clinicians for teaching was also regarded as a valuable trend. The experts considered that jointly
created study cases are more robust teaching tools. However, it was recognized that the clinical
directive to properly diagnose, treat, and move on is of limited value to a physiology student.
Moreover, educator´s role switch from content provider to facilitator of critical thinking has been
noted.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.13

Diversification of funding sources was also seen as a future trend. Physiological Societies must
continue to advocate the need to adequately fund physiology research through public agencies.
Cooperation with industries (instrumentation, software, AI) is seen as a way to broaden the
funding sources and enable access and input into new technologies. Appropriate science
communication will be needed in these efforts.
Finally, the experts agreed that Physiology will maintain a proper identity in years to come.
Regarding research, physiology is believed to stay in the forefront of life sciences for new
knowledge, new technologies, and new skills.
Keywords: Research trends, teaching trends, physiologists’ future
Presenting author profile
João Gregório is an Assistant Researcher at CBIOS, Research Center for Biosciences & Health
Technologies. He has a Ph.D. in International Health with a specialization in Health Policies and
his current research interests lie in areas such as health services development, information and
communication technologies applied in health service provision and capacity building of human
resources for health.

THEME 3 PHYSIOLOGY OF STRESS
3.1. MENTAL AND PHYSICAL PREPARATION IMPROVES PERFORMANCE IN COGNITIVE
TASKS
Carlos Moreira1; Daniel Rocha1; Paula Carvalho3; Carolina Amorim1; Ana Gouveia2; Hugo A.
Ferreira1
1 - Instituto de Biofísica e Engenharia Biomédica, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de
Lisboa; 2 - Faculdade de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade da Beira Interior; 3 - Faculdade de
Ciências Sociais e Humanas, Universidade da Beira Interior
In this study we assessed the impact of a proper physical and mental preparation on the
performance of gaming-related reaction and cognitive tasks. Ten male subjects (mean age 24.5
± 2.2 years) participated in 5 sequential sessions, every weekday. Subjects were divided equally
into 2 groups: one group followed an audio guide with a mental and physical preparation (MPP)
and then completed the tasks, while the control group immediately started performing the tasks.
The MPP audio guide included muscular contraction, followed by relaxation for several muscle
groups, as well as a mindfulness relaxation protocol.
In total, subjects were asked to complete 2 reaction tasks simulating aspects of first-person
shooter games, and 5 cognitive tasks. All subjects used a wearable headband (EMOTAI) to
assess brain activity via 2 electroencephalography (EEG) prefrontal cortex channels and
photoplethysmography (PPG), which informs about heart rate (HR) and its variability. After each

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.14

session, the subjects were asked to fill in the NASA-TLX questionnaire for each task, assessing
the perceived workload.
Overall, the reported task load decreased over the 5 sessions for both groups but was always
lower and decreased faster for the MPP group. On the last day, the MPP group perceived the
tasks to be 44% easier than the control group. The performance in all tasks was consistently
better in the MPP group. Reaction time was on average 7 ms faster and time to aim was 30 ms
faster than the control group. Additionally, by the fifth session, the MPP group achieved a 96%
accuracy in the memory tasks, versus 92% for the control group. The MPP group maintained their
HR relatively constant at an average of 72.5 bpm throughout the week for all tasks. On the other
hand, the control group increased the heart rate up to 83 bpm in the same period of time. By the
end of the week, the two groups differed by almost 8 bpm or 10%.
Keywords: Performance, cognition, EEG, wearable
Presenting author profile
Carlos Moreira is an MSc in Biomedical Engineering and Biophysics from the Faculty of Sciences
of the University of Lisbon. For his dissertation, he developed a multiplayer BCI game controlled
using steady-state visually-evoked potentials, to study cooperative behaviors using EEG. Now
pursuing a Ph.D. in Biomedical Engineering at IBEB, in the field of cognitive and emotional
assessment using physiological signals, his goal is to assess mental workload while operating
critical devices or systems.

3.2. REDOX REGULATION OF BREAST CANCER PROGRESSION: INSIGHTS FROM SOD
MIMICS
Nuno Saraiva1; Ana S Flórido2; João G Costa1; Ines Batinic-Haberle3; Matilde Castro2; Nuno G
Oliveira2; Ana S Fernandes1
1 - CBIOS, Universidade Lusófona Research Center for Biosciences & Health Technologies,
Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Research Institute for Medicines (iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy,
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal; 3 - Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University
Medical School, Durham, NC, USA
Superoxide dismutase (SOD) levels seem to be relevant for breast carcinogenesis, but the role
of these enzymes is not yet clearly understood. Contradictory reports on the influence of SOD in
breast cancer can be found in the literature. SOD mimics (SODm) are synthetic compounds with
drug-like properties, with the ability to mimic the functional properties of SOD. These compounds
have been used in breast cancer models as mechanistic tools to explore the redox regulation of
cancer development. In this perspective, SODm may also help to understand the involvement of
reactive oxygen species in the mechanisms of toxicity induced by carcinogenic agents. SODm
have also been suggested as redox-active drugs for breast cancer treatment. SODm may have
inherent antiproliferative effects in breast cancer cells. Moreover, many studies have shown that
the combination of SODm with chemotherapy or radiotherapy may be advantageous both by

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.15

boosting the efficacy of anticancer treatments and by protecting non-cancer tissues from their
adverse side effects. Interestingly, we have also recently demonstrated that SODm can impact
breast cancer cell adhesion, migration, and invasion, which are key features for the formation of
metastases. This presentation will address the usefulness of SODm in the context of breast
cancer, either as therapeutic drugs or as mechanistic tools.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT,
Portugal), through funding UID/DTP/04567/2019 to CBIOS and UID/DTP/04138/2019 to
iMed.ULisboa.
Keywords: breast cancer, superoxide dismutase mimics, cell migration, redox regulation
Presenting author profile
Ana Sofia Fernandes graduated in Pharmaceutical Sciences (2004), has a Ph.D. in Pharmacy
(specialty of Toxicology, 2010) and is a European Registered Toxicologist (2018). She is an
Assistant Professor at Universidade Lusófona. She is also the Scientific Director for Innovation
and the coordinator of the Laboratory of Pharmacology and Therapeutics of CBIOS Research
Center. She has published, from 2007 on, over 40 scientific full papers indexed to
Scopus/Pubmed. She is author/co-author of around 100 scientific communications (oral and
panel) and she received four awards. Her main research interest is to explore the impact of
ROS and redox modulators on cancer etiology and progression.

3.3. EFFECTS OF ASTAXANTHIN SUPPLEMENTATION ON OVALBUMIN-INDUCED
EXPERIMENTAL ASTHMA MODEL IN RATS
Hasan İlker Coban1; Muaz Belviranli1; Nilsel Okudan1
1 - Department of Physiology Faculty of Medicine Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey
The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of astaxanthin supplementation on biochemical
markers of asthma and oxidative stress and antioxidant defense markers in rats induced an
experimental asthma model.
Twenty-two male Wistar albino rats were used and the rats were randomly assigned to control (n:
6), asthma (n: 8), and asthma+astaxanthin (n: 8) groups. The rats in the asthma + astaxanthin
group were given 10 mg / kg astaxanthin dissolved in corn oil for 22 days via oral gavage. The
rats in the asthma groups were given 200 μg ovalbumin / 10 mg Al(OH)3 dissolved in 1 ml saline
solution via intraperitoneally on 1, 2, 3 and 11 days of the study. On the 20th, 21th and 22nd days
of the study, the rats were anesthetized with ether and administered 1.5 mg of ovalbumin
dissolved in 300 μl saline solution via intranasally. Blood samples were taken under ketamine /
xylazine anesthesia on 23th day of the study. Then lung tissue samples were taken after the
cervical dislocation. IgE, MDA and GSH levels were analyzed in these samples.
In this study, IgE levels in the lung tissue of the asthma group were higher than the other groups.
The elevation of MDA levels in both the serum and the lung tissues of the asthma group indicated

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.16

that asthma causes oxidative stress. In addition, decreased levels of MDA in the asthma +
astaxanthin group indicate that astaxanthin reduced oxidative stress. The elevation of GSH levels
in the lung tissue in the asthma group indicated that asthma activates the antioxidant defense
system, whereas the asthma+astaxanthin group returns to the normal levels.
Keywords: Astaxanthin, asthma, oxidative stress, ovalbumin

THEME 4 BY WAY OF THE SKIN
4.1. PRELIMINARY EVALUATION OF NON-CONVENTIONAL CONDUCTIVE MATERIALS
FOR ELECTRODERMAL ACTIVITY DATA ACQUISITION
António Banganho1,2; Hugo Silva1; Marcelino Santos2,3
1 - IT – Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa,
Portugal; 3 - INESC-ID, Lisboa, Portuga
Introduction: Electrodermal activity (EDA) signal carries useful information about the
sympathetic nervous system. Normally, it is recorded using non-polarizable Ag/AgCl electrodes,
on the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, which, in turn, can impose a hard constraint. More
convenient locations and sensor setups are needed. A solution may pass by the use of e-textiles
or 3D printed materials as electrodes since they can be integrated in a seamless manner and
present advantageous proprieties useful for long-term recordings.
Methods: Conductive leather (GMLC), Lycra (MedTexP-130), and PLA (3D) materials were
tested as electrodes, compared with dry Ag/AgCl electrodes from Thought Technology,
considered as the gold standard. We used several know resistances, each at a time, ranging from
50kΩ to 3MΩ with tolerances of 1%, and connected them to a BITalino EDA sensor and
acquisition board, via the electrodes. Each electrode had a 1 cm2 contact area, and exosomatic
DC technique was the chosen method for EDA recording. A total of 10 measurements were taken
with each resistance and each electrode material to and the Pearson correlation coefficients were
computed in regard to the gold standard.
Results: The conductive lycra showed high correlation (r=0.999 ± 0.000) as well as a very low
resistivity of 4.27Ω.cm2. The 3D electrodes presented a resistivity of 3.3kΩ.cm2 and high
correlation (r=0.950 ± 0.005), although having an increased deviation under the 100kΩ mark. The
conductive leather performed the worst, nonetheless, with good correlation (r=0.718 ± 0.041) and
resistivity of 3.5kΩ.cm2, while suffering as well of an increased deviation under 0.5MΩ.
Conclusions: Conductive lycra is the most promising material, opening the possibility to integrate
EDA sensors in a more seamless fashion. Further studies should focus on testing the different

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.17

electrode materials on live subjects to further validate our results and also study other possible
locations to extract the EDA.
Keywords: Electrodermal activity, physiology, electrodes, e-textiles
Presenting author profile
António Banganho received the B.S. degree in Biomedical Engineering from the Instituto Superior
de Engenharia de Coimbra - Instituto Politécnico de Coimbra, Portugal, and currently pursuing
the M.S. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering from Instituto Superior Técnico –
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal, with the thesis “Electrodermal Activity Sensor (EDA) with
Adaptive Gain Control” with the support of Instituto de Telecomunicações (IT) and INESC-ID.

4.2. 3D REPRESENTATION OF SKIN VISCOELASTICITY
Henrique Silva1; Francisco Rego2; Catarina Rosado1; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1
1 - Universidade Lusófona, School of Health Sc & Technologies, CBiOS (Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies), Campo Grande 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 Universidade de Lisboa, Instituto Superior Técnico, Institute for Systems and Robotics (ISR),
Lisboa, Portugal
The biomechanical characterization of skin is still a permanent challenge for clinical practice as
for research. Recently, a new instrument, the Cutiscan® was developed for the assessment of
viscoelasticity and anisotropy, allowing in vivo quantifications over a 360 angle degree range. Our
objective is to explore new representation strategies for skin viscoelasticity based on the
Cutiscan® principle by creating new dynamic quantitative parameters. The Cutiscan® is equipped
with a combined vacuum-camera probe that creates skin suction and quantifies it in terms of
displacement over time for each angle. We present data from a suction test applied to the
forehead, volar forearm and leg of twenty healthy female subjects (37.0 ± 18.7 years, 10 young
and 10 older), after giving informed consent. We created polar and non-polar 3D representations
(time-displacement-angle), from which several dynamic parameters were calculated stretchability, stretching speed, stretching time and rise time. Results suggest that older subjects
display larger displacement heights, displacement slopes and also higher rise and stretching
times, irrespective of orientation. Important differences were noted between different skin sites.
Apparently these novel Cutiscan®-based 3D representations and parameters are sensitive and
useful to characterize biomechanical changes occurring with skin ageing.
Keywords: skin viscoelasticity, skin anisotropy, Cutiscan, 3D representation

4.3. HYDROGEL CONTAINING CHITOSAN-COATED PLGA NANOPARTICLES FOR
TOPICAL DELIVERY OF INSULIN
Patrícia Filipe1,2; Ana S. Macedo1,3; Catarina Rosado1; Pedro Fonte1,3,4

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.18

1 - CBIOS - Universidade Lusófona Research Center for Biosciences & Health Technologies,
Campo Grande 376, 1749–024 Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Alcalá, Ctra. Madrid-Barcelona Km. 33.600, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid,
Spain; 3 - LAQV, REQUIMTE, Department of Chemical Sciences—Applied Chemistry Lab,
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, 228, 4050-313 Porto,
Portugal; 4 - iBB-Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Department of Bioengineering,
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal
Purpose: Insulin is a therapeutic protein that may be used as a growth factor in skin regeneration
(1). The topical delivery of insulin is a challenge due to the harsh conditions of the wound bed.
Neutrophils are the first inflammatory cells to appear in the wound, followed by lymphocytes and
monocytes. These inflammatory cells produce proteinases and reactive oxygen species to protect
the wound against infections (2). Our purpose was to develop a hydrogel containing nanoparticles
to effectively deliver insulin on the skin by using a nanocarrier system that allows increased
mucoadhesion, protein stabilization, and bioactivity.
Methods: Chitosan-coated PLGA nanoparticles were produced using a w/o/w double emulsion,
and coated with chitosan at different concentrations (0.25%, 0.5% and 1%). The particles were
further incorporated in a hydrogel containing cellulose gum, propylene glycol, and alginate. The
particle and hydrogel features were evaluated.
Results and Discussion: The modified solvent evaporation method based on a w/o/w double
emulsion technique was effective to coat the PLGA nanoparticles with divergent proportions of
chitosan. Evaluation of physicochemical characteristics of uncoated and chitosan coated PLGA
nanoparticles were assembled. The size of chitosan-coated PLGA nanoparticles is enhanced by
the increase of chitosan concentration. Uncoated PLGA nanoparticles presents a negative zeta
potential due to natural negative charge of PLGA and chitosan-coated PLGA nanoparticles retain
a positive charge due to chitosan. The AE of insulin was 80-90%, and the hydrogel had good
viscosity for topical administration Finally, the developed technique enabled to yield a chitosancoated PLGA nanoparticles hydrogel system with suitable properties. Finally, a hydrogel with
good homogeneity and rheological properties was obtained.
Conclusions: The developed delivery system is capable to protect insulin structure and grants a
moisty environment required to promote wound healing.
Acknowledgments: This work was financed by FEDER - Fundo Europeu de Desenvolvimento
Regional funds through the COMPETE 2020 - Operational Programme for Competitiveness and
Internationalization (POCI), and by Portuguese funds through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e
a Tecnologia (FCT) in the framework of the project POCI-01-0145-FEDER-032610 - PTDC/MECDER/32610/2017. It was also supported by FCT under the project UID/DTP/04567/2019.
References:
[1] Hrynyk M, et al., Int J Pharm., 398(1–2):146-154.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.19

[2] Auf Dem Keller U, et al., J Investig Dermatology Symp Proc, 11(1):106-111.
Keywords: insulin, wound healing, chitosan, nanoparticles, PLGA, hydrogel
Presenting author profile
Currently, Patrícia Filipe is a Ph.D. student in the Health Sciences at Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies (CBIOS), Escola de Ciências e Tecnologias da Saúde Universidade Lusófona in partnership with the University of Alcalá de Henares. Her work focuses
on the regeneration of human tissues and wound healing. She has several oral and poster
presentations in scientific meetings.

4.4. DEVELOPMENT OF RUTIN-LOADED HYBRID NANOPARTICLES FOR WOUND
HEALING
Ana Júlio1,2; Rita Caparica1,2; Sofia A. Costa Lima3; Ana Sofia Fernandes1; Catarina Rosado1;
Duarte M. F. Prazeres4; Salette Reis3; Tânia Santos De Almeida1,5; Pedro Fonte1,3,4,5
1 - CBIOS - Universidade Lusófona Research Center for Biosciences & Health Technologies,
Campo Grande 376, 1749–024 Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Alcalá, Ctra. Madrid-Barcelona Km. 33.600, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid,
Spain; 3 - LAQV, REQUIMTE, Department of Chemical Sciences—Applied Chemistry Lab,
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, 228, 4050-313 Porto,
Portugal; 4 - iBB-Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Department of Bioengineering,
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal; 5 - Shared senior
authorship

THEME 5 PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORMATICS
5.1. AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION OF PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS MODALITIES
Patrícia Bota1,2; Ana Fred1,2; João Valente3; Hugo Silva1
1 - Instituto Superior Técnico, Instituto de Telecomunicações; 2 - Department of Bioengineering,
Instituto Superior Técnico; 3 - Instituto Politécnico de Castelo Branco
Introduction: Over the last years, multimodal devices for biomedical research have greatly
spread to everyone’s daily lives. These enable the use of various combinations of physiological
sensors, however, little attention has been paid to the problem of automatic identification of each
sensor type, the knowledge of which, being of paramount importance to the adequate design of
the subsequent processing and data analysis tasks.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.20

Methods: In this work we propose a framework for the automatic identification of sensor data
type, namely Respiration, Electrocardiography, Galvanic Skin Response, Blood Volume Pulse
data, through a Random Forest (RF) classifier in two data representation spaces: (1) featurebased; (2) dissimilarity-based. The main contribution of our work consists in the recognition of
physiological data both in online (evaluation per sample) and offline (evaluation per user modality
file through a majority voting system) scenarios, comparing the classification results in different
data spaces.
Results: We performed a comprehensive study of supervised learning classifiers, and for the
dissimilarity-based approach of: (a) similarity metrics; (b) data space representations; and (c)
sample aggregation techniques for the creation of the prototypes. A better performance was
obtained for the offline setting, with the dissimilarity-based approach achieving an accuracy of
98.5 ± 1.5 and 94.1 ± 5.0% using an RF classifier, the Euclidean distance and the medoid metric.
These results were surpassed by the RF in the feature-based space reaching an accuracy of 99.7
± 0.8 and 98.4 ± 2.5%, for two datasets, respectively.
Conclusions: Experimental results on two databases comprising 4 signal modalities led to high
accuracy results, thus paving the way to the development of systems capable of automatically
identifying the sensor types solely based on the structure of the data stream itself, and
subsequently apply the most appropriate data processing and analysis frameworks.
Keywords: Machine learning, signal classification, physiological signals
Presenting author profile
Patrícia Bota received her MSc in Biomedical Engineering from FCT/UNL. Currently, she is a
Ph.D. student at IST/UL and a researcher at the IT-Lx Pattern and Image Analysis group, where
she is involved in the study of the media's impact on human emotions, cognition and behaviour
through the development of machine learning algorithms for the recognition of affect based on
multi-source physiological data.

5.2. LIGHT-TISSUE INTERACTION AND MICROCIRCULATION PERFUSION ASSESSMENT
– WHATS’ NEW?
Henrique Silva1,3; Hugo Ferreira2; Rafaela Francisco3; Alain-Pierre Gadeau4; Luis Monteiro
Rodrigues1,3
1 – Universidade Lusófona, School of Health Sc & Technologies, CbiOS (Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies), Campo Grande 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 –
Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, IBEB Institute Bioph Biomed Engineering, Lisboa,
Portugal; 3 – Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc Depart – Lisboa,
Portugal; 4 – U Bordeaux & INSERM, U1034, Adaptation cardiovasculaire à l’ischémie, F-33600,
Pessac, France

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.21

Microcirculation is often assessed by noninvasive technologies such as laser Doppler flowmetry
(LDF), laser Doppler perfusion imaging (LDPI), photoplethysmography (PPG) and, more recently,
polarized light spectroscopy (PLS). LDF and PPG measure perfusion in a small tissue region on
a continuous mode, producing complex and multiscaled oscillatory signals, easily decomposed
into their main spectral components (cardiac, respiratory, myogenic, sympathetic, endothelial NOdependent and endothelial NO-independent) with fast Fourier (FFT) and wavelet transforms
(WT), allowing the individual assessment of different perfusion regulating mechanisms. LDPI and
PLS evaluate perfusion over larger tissue areas and produce maps with different color tones and
textures as main outputs, even though LDPI can also be used on a single-point continuous mode.
These perfusion maps can be assessed with texture analysis to obtain a clearer picture of the
perfusion regulation at a regional level. A useful parameter to extract from all these signals is
entropy, a measure of unpredictability, which often mirrors the competence of the biological
system generating those signals. Here, the authors present data from studies from human
(postural changes, hyperoxia) and animal (hind limb ischemia, hyperoxia) models, with focus on
the combined use of the aforementioned tools for a more robust signal analysis and a deeper
understanding of microcirculation dynamic physiology.
Keywords: microcirculation, laser Doppler techniques, polarized light spectroscopy, wavelet
transform, light-tissue interaction

5.3. DETECTION OF APNEA IN RESPIRATORY SIGNALS
Mariana Abreu1; Ana Fred1,2; João Valente3; Hugo Silva1
1 - Instituto Superior Técnico, Instituto de Telecomunicações; 2 - Instituto Superior Técnico,
Departamento de Bioengenharia; 3 - Instituto Politécnico de Castelo Branco, Escola Superior de
Saúde
Background: Breathing plays an essential role in our life and prolongated breathing interruptions,
denominated apneas, can be both life-threatening and consciously provoked. In thoracic
radiotherapy, the conjugation of the dose administration with respiratory gating, which significantly
improves the display of the internal structures, is essential to proper administration of the
treatment. Thus, the discrimination between apneas (A) and normal (R) samples in a simple and
automatic way would enable a deeper understanding both on the patients’ wellbeing and the
control over the radiotherapy session.
Methods: With pattern recognition algorithms we classified one-minute samples as A or R,
according to their morphology. The respiratory signal was filtered and normalized with MinMax,
and resampled to 1000 points. To detect different morphologies, an autoencoder (AE) was trained
on R type samples. Then, all data was fed to the AE and the output was compared to the input
using Pearson's correlation, in 10 non-overlapping segments. To reach a decision, these
correlation vectors were learned by a classifier.
Results: The database used was acquired by João Valente, and contained 45 patients, where
each performed a breathing exercise from which we can extract 10 R and 5 A. The application of

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.22

our framework achieved an accuracy of 84%7.2, with the classifier SVM. Moreover, fusion
decision systems were evaluated and improved performance by 2 percentual points with SVM
and RF.
Conclusions: In this study we developed a simple morphological framework to discriminate
apneas from normal breathing in awaken patients. The system was able to detect apneas even
when contaminated with normal breathing without requiring strenuous feature engineering, just
by morphology comparison. In the future, we would like to go even further and contributing to the
community with an anomaly detector for respiration.
Keywords: Deep learning, signal processing, physiological data, apnea detection
Presenting author profile
Mariana Abreu completed her Master’s Degree in Biomedical Engineering in 2018, from FCTUNL. Her master thesis included the application of pattern recognition techniques to automatic
recognition of human activities. During the thesis period, she worked in Fraunhofer, on the
development of feature engineering and visualization tools, for time series applications. Currently
she is a Ph.D. student at IST, in the scope of IT’s PIA group. Her Ph.D. is on Prediction and
Monitoring of Epileptic Seizures, and her areas of interest are Signal Processing and Machine
Learning.

5.4. ANXIETY DESTROYER: A VIDEOGAME WITH NEUROFEEDBACK FOR TACKLING
ANXIETY
Pedro Pestana Da Silva1; Hugo A. Ferreira1
1 - Instituto de Biofísica e Engenharia Biomédica, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de
Lisboa
Anxiety disorder is one of the most common mental illnesses, affecting 264 million people
worldwide. Current treatments such as drugs and psychotherapy are limited because they cause
side effects such as addiction and/or require long therapeutic periods. A more recent technique,
Neurofeedback (NFB), that makes use of the patients’ own brain signals to modulate brain activity
via audio or visual stimuli, has been associated with the reduction of anxious symptomatology.
Nonetheless, it typically uses unappealing stimuli that compromise patient adherence.
In this work a videogame was developed, Anxiety Destroyer, that makes use of
electroencephalography (EEG)-based NFB, with the goal of providing an engaging and efficient
treatment to be used at home. In this videogame, patients use their brain signals to drive a
spacecraft from Earth to an extra-solar planet through 8 levels of increasing difficulty in order to
modulate their brain activity.
Thirty subjects were studied, which performed up to 8 NFB sessions for 35 minutes. Three groups
of 10 subjects were created: one group used NFB with the frontal alpha asymmetry (ALAY)

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.23

protocol (F4-F3), a reported anxiety biomarker; another with asymmetry between AF4 and AF3
channels (AF) for hairless skin usage; and the control group, with increased alpha in F4 and F3
(F+). Data was acquired using an Emotiv Epoc+ EEG headset and recorded for further analysis.
The Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) was also applied to assess anxiety at baseline and after
intervention with NFB.
The ALAY group significantly increased the asymmetry (p <0.05) (reduction of the anxiety
biomarker), with a corresponding significant reduction (p <0.01) in anxiety reported by the BAI
after NFB training. The AF group showed a decrease in the frontal alpha asymmetry, and the F+
a slight increase with corresponding increase and decrease of the BAI scores.
Studies with larger sample sizes are required to confirm these results, especially since some
subjects in the AF and F+ groups abandoned the study because of no perceived effects. However,
this study suggests the effectiveness of the videogame in the reduction of anxious
symptomatology.
Keywords: Anxiety, electroencephalography, neurofeedback, gaming
Presenting author profile
Pedro Pestana da Silva is a MSc in Biomedical Engineering. His research is focused on the
development of physiological computing applications using neurofeedback and artificial
intelligence algorithms. Finally, he is also the CEO of Neroes, a startup that provides solutions for
performance improvement in sports.

POSTERS
THEMES 1 & 2 BEYOND INTEGRATIVE PHYSIOLOGY – THE PHYSIOME
P01 - ADHERENCE TO THE MEDITERRANEAN DIET IN PORTUGUESE UNIVERSITY
STUDENTS
Cíntia Ferreira-Pêgo1,2; Joana Rodrigues2; Adriana Costa2; Bruno Sousa1,2
1 - CBIOS Lusófona's Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies, Av. Campo
Grande 376, 1749-024 Lisbon, Portugal.; 2 - School of Sciences and Health Technologies,
Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisboa, Portugal
Mediterranean diet (MedDiet) is one of the most recognized healthy dietary patterns. Although
the well-known beneficial effects of healthy eating habits on academic performance, the university
students used to present unhealthy food choices. Cross-sectional information regarding MedDiet
adherence was collected in 305 students from the Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e
Tecnologias, from different academic courses, related or not with health sciences. Nutrition

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.24

students presented significantly higher MedDiet adherence compared to those studying
pharmaceutical sciences and also from other courses not related to health sciences. 28.90% of
the total population presented poor MedDiet adherence, 58.70% presented an average
adherence and only 12.50% presented a good MedDiet adherence. Nutrition sciences degree
presented more students in the highest category of MedDiet adherence compared to the rest.
Pharmaceutical students and other students not related to health sciences presented a
significantly higher risk of poor MedDiet adherence. Nutrition students presented the highest
MedDiet adherence of all the students analyzed. Pharmaceutical students, although being health
professionals, showed poor adherence to the MedDiet, similar to students from courses not
related to health sciences.
Keywords: Mediterranean diet, Mediterranean diet adherence, health sciences students,
university students, Portuguese students
Presenting author profile
She graduated in Human Nutrition and Dietetics in Universitat Rovira i Virgili and has a master’s
degree in Training and Sports Nutrition from the Universidad Europea de Madrid. She obtained
her Ph.D. with International Mention in Nutrition and Metabolism from the Universitat Rovira i
Virgili and University of Arkansas. Her main epidemiological research interests are the
Mediterranean Diet, dairy products, hydration and/or the consumption of beverages and its
relation with health and disease.

P02 - WHAT HAPPENS IN THE FOOT MICROCIRCULATION DURING WALKING?
Margarida Florindo1
1 - Portuguese Red Cross Health School, ESSCVP-Lisboa
The foot microcirculation is crucial for gait function. The aim of this study was to determine what
happens in the foot microcirculation measured at different depths during walking. Nine healthy
subjects (five women and four men) 28.6 ± 10 y.o., were included after informed written
consent. Volunteers performed a five minutes’ walk and microcirculation was assessed and
compared before (Phase 1) and after walking (Phase 2). The local microcirculatory function was
quantified by photoplethysmography (PPG) laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) and Polarised
Spectroscopy (TiVi) to quantify the concentration of red blood cells (CMRBC). Probes were
placed as close as possible to each other, from 1 cm postero-medial of the first metatarsus
head. Descriptive and comparative statistics were applied and a 95% level of confidence
adopted. Our study demonstrated significant changes from Phase 1 to Phase 2 in PPG results
(p = 0.012 and 0.027) for left and right limbs, respectively, and also for both sides in LDFs’
CMBC assessment (both p = 0.038). A slight rise in skin temperature in both feet was
registered. Perfusion units (PU) and TiVi-index presented similar results for these two phases,
which shows a fast and effective capacity of the regulatory mechanisms involved in
microcirculatory homeostasis.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.25

Keywords: foot microcirculation, PPG, CMRBC
Presenting author profile
Physiotherapist since 1984, specialized in the area of neuromuscular conditions, with clinical
practice to present date. She is teaching as an assistant professor at ESSCVP-Lisboa where she
also works as a Department Director. She is a Ph.D. student at the School of Health Sciences
and Technologies of Lusófona University and researcher at CBIOS - Research Center for
Biosciences & Health Technologies.

P03 - COMPARING LASER DOPPLER FLOWMETRY AND POLARIZED SPECTROSCOPY
FOR ASSESSING PERFUSION DURING SQUATTING
Sérgio Nuno1,2; Henrique Silva2,3; Luís Monteiro Rodrigues2,3
1 - Lisbon School of Health Technology of the Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon, ESTeSL-IPL,
Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - School of Health Sc & Technologies, CBiOS (Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies), U Lusófona, Campo Grande 376, 1749-024, Lisboa,
Portugal; 3 - Faculty of Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sciences Departm., U Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
Laser Doppler Flowmetry (LDF) is one of the most used techniques for the continuous
assessment of microcirculation. However, it highly affected by spatial variability resulting from the
small measurement area and the large heterogeneity in microvascular morphology and topology.
Recently, a non-contact technique based on polarization spectroscopy (PS), allowing
subepidermal imaging of large skin areas - the Tissue Viability (TiVi®) System was introduced.
Despite its broad interest, studies comparing it to LDF are lacking. The aim of this study was to
compare the LDF and PS techniques for cutaneous perfusion assessment during a squatting
exercise test. Five young healthy male (26.0 ± 6.5 y.o.) performed a squatting exercise, consisting
in standing up straight for 3 minutes, then performing 15 squat repetitions for 1 minute and
returning to the initial position for further 3 minutes. Both techniques were used to follow all
hemodynamics at foot dorsum – LDF quantified blood perfusion, concentration of moving red
blood cells (CMBC) and velocity, while PS quantified the TiVi index, a parameter related to the
concentration of red blood cells (CMBC). The LDF probe was placed on the foot dorsum, on the
projection of the fifth metatarsophalangeal joint, while the PS signal was obtained by placing the
device at a 60cm distance from the foot on without ambient light. During the squatting exercise a
significant increase in blood flow and CMBC was observed with LDF, together with a significant
decrease in velocity, on both limbs. The TiVi index increased bilaterally, however, without
statistical differences. These results suggest that, in the present experimental conditions, TiVi
appears to be less sensitive than LDF, probably due to different penetration depths to be further
clarified.
Keywords: Laser Doppler Flowmetry, tissue viability, microcirculation, squatting exercise test
Presenting author profile

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.26

Sérgio Nuno received a degree in Physical Therapy - Portuguese Red Cross Higher Education
with allocation of scholarship merit with average of 18.1 values in 2010. He earned his Master’s
Degree in Physical Therapy with average of 17 values. He is a Ph.D. Student (U Lusófona with U
Alcalá partnership). In 4 years of higher education, he has had a merit scholarship by the Portucel
Soporcel Group. He has worked at the hospital "Clínica São João de Deus" since 2010 and is
currently the coordinator of the Physiotherapy Service. He is a physiotherapist responsible for the
National rowing team and had achieved clearance for the Olympic Games. He is also a teacher
at the Lisbon School of Health Technology of the Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon, ESTeSL-IPL.

P04 - MNTNHEX-2-PYP, A SOD MIMIC AS A MECHANISTIC TOOL TO STUDY RENAL
CANCER PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
João G. Costa1; Nuno Saraiva1; Ines Batinic-Haberle2; Nuno G. Oliveira3; Ana S. Fernandes1
1 - CBIOS, Universidade Lusófona Research Center for Biosciences & Health Technologies,
Campo Grande 376, 1749-024 Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke
University Medical School, Durham, NC, USA; 3 - Research Institute for Medicines
(iMed.ULisboa), Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade de Lisboa, Av. Professor Gama Pinto, 1649003 Lisboa, Portugal
Cancer is a multistep process and oxidative stress has been pointed out to have critical roles on
its initiation, promotion and progression. The present work addresses the redox modulation
afforded by the superoxide dismutase mimic MnTnHex-2-PyP (MnP), a prototype of the
Manganese(III) porphyrins (MnPs), which are catalytical polyfunctional antioxidants with the
ability to modulate different cellular redox pathways. Therefore, MnPs can be used as mechanistic
tools to increase our insight into renal cancer pathophysiology.
Two different renal cell models were used to address initiation and progression cellular events.
First, the role of MnP on the toxicity of non-tumor renal cells exposed to the ochratoxin A (OTA),
a recognized nephrotoxicant with possible carcinogenic effects, was evaluated. Afterwards, the
role of the MnP in renal cancer progression was studied in vitro. Complementary endpoints of
cytotoxicity and genotoxicity, as well as the intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels,
and migration assays were performed. Overall, this MnP protected non-tumor cells from the toxic
effects induced by OTA, while it had a beneficial effect against renal cancer cells, namely by
decreasing the cell viability and migration. The results obtained herein reinforce the multiple
applications of MnPs both as mechanistic tools and also for potential therapeutic use.
Keyword: SOD mimic, pathophysiology, renal cancer, MnTnHex-2-PyP

P05 - THE BRIEF HISTORY OF NEUROSCIENCE IN TURKEY
Ozge Selin Cevik1; Dilan Deniz Koyuncu1; Leyla Sahin1

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.27

1 - Mersin University
Turkey, which is located in the connection between Asia and Europe, has hosted a variety of
nations during the centuries. Hence, all civilizations have unique effects on development of all
aspects of medicine and surgery in pre-modern era. Starting with Seljuks to Ottomon Empire and
by now the Republic of Turkey, beginning with İbni Sina (980-1037) to Hacı Pasha (1385-1417)
and Serafeddin Sabuncuoglu (1385-1470) many improvements have taken place regarding to
medical sciences, particularly in neuroscience parallel to the modern world.
By the mid-19th century, Turkish scientists turned more in Western Medicine and the onset of
modern neurosurgery was performed via Dr. Cemil Topuzlu and he has founded the first
neurosurgery department in 1923. The emergence of neuroscience in Turkey may be attributed
to Dr. Mazhar Osman who evaluated the reasons of many neuropsychiatric diseases and
published the first Turkish neuroscience journal (1916). Then, Gazi Yasargil, who made a
breakthrough in aneurysm surgeries via designing a special microscope, used microsurgery
techniques in neurosurgery field and was selected as the neurosurgeon of the century. He has
found new techniques in the treatment of epilepsy and brain tumors (1960s).
At the present time, there is an increasing number of publications by Turkish scientists,
contributing to the total body of literature in neuroscience and follow the contemporary trends in
this field. In order to mention few of them as, Ahmet Höke has significant studies about defects in
peripheral neural system and the basic biology of Schwann cells and in vivo/vitro modelling of
axonal degeneration and regeneration, Tarık Tihan has tremendous work about the
categorization of brain tumors, Deniz Kırık who has many studies in the field of neuroscience and
has discovered new cell and gene-based therapies against Parkinson and Huntington diseases,
Ziya Gokaslan called as ‘who define spine again’ has contributed new surgery methods in spinal
cord cancers in medical literature, Turgay Dalkara guides many neuroscientists concerning the
working patterns of brain, Murat Emre who has found a new drug against Parkinson related
dementia, Emrah Duzel who has remarkable studies to repair injured tissues or de novo tissue
formation.
Keywords: Neuroscience, Turkey, history, physiology
Presenting author profile
I am currently working on learning - memory behaviour in Physiology Department, Mersin
University as a research assistant. I am now doing my Ph.D. studying postnatal stresshippocampus function relations and related genes.

P06 - NON-CONTACT POLARIZED SPECTROSCOPY CAN BE USED TO EXPLORE
SUPERFICIAL MICROCIRCULATORY ADAPTATION IN THE HUMAN LOWER LIMB
Clemente Rocha1; Sérgio Nuno1,2,3; Henrique Silva1,4; Hugo Ferreira5

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.28

1 - Universidade Lusófona CBIOS - Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies,
Av Campo Grande, 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Clínica S João de Deus – CTD, Lisboa
Portugal; 3 - Lisbon School of Health Technology of the Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon, ESTeSLIPL, Lisboa, PORTUGAL; 4 - Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc
Depart., Lisboa, Portugal; 5 - Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences – IBEB, Lisboa,
Portugal
The use of non-contact systems in in vivo microcirculation studies facilitates assessment and the
application of research protocols, in human beings, which means a deeper insight in
microcirculatory physiology and pathophysiology. In this study, we explore the applicability of a
non-contact polarized spectroscopy method to complement the conventional use of contact and
well-known systems, such as Laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) in evaluating the lower limb
microcirculation in a challenge test, such as a massage manoeuvre.
Six healthy volunteers (44.83 ± 12.64 years old) both sexes, were submitted to one massage
protocol (applied in the proximal direction) in one randomly selected limb, the other serving as
control. The protocol included three phases, a 10 minute baseline (Phase I) period, a 5 minute
massage (Phase II), and a 10 minute recovery (Phase III) recordings with Tissue Viability Imager
(TiVi) and Laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) signals being obtained from both limbs (leg and second
toe, respectively). TiVi allows to detect skins’ red blood cell concentration (RBCC), expressed in
TiVi-index arbitrary units, while with LDF perfusion is described in terms of arbitrary Blood
Perfusion Units (BPUs). A p<0.05 was adopted.
The manoeuvre evoked blood perfusion alterations detected with both systems. Both systems
allowed to follow the perfusion changes in both limbs. LDF has shown a significant decrease
during Phase II in the test limb and a non-significant decrease in the contralateral limb. As for
TiVi, during Phase II, an increase in the RBCC contralateral limb is present, although not
significant in accordance with the known responses to these manoeuvres. Also, our results
suggest that TiVi does complement the instrumentation available to study microvascular
adaptation in vivo.
Keywords: Polarized spectroscopy, LDF, microcirculation, lower limb cooperation, massage

P17 – ABIETANE DITERPENOIDS FROM PLECTRANTHUS SPP. AS A NEW CLASS OF
PROTEIN KINASE C MODULATORS FOR CANCER THERAPY
Patrícia Rijo1
1 – Center for Research in Biosciences & Health Technologies (CBIOS)
Cancer is one of the highest causes of death worldwide. Protein kinase C (PKC) is a family of
serine/threonine kinases divided into three groups according to their regulatory domain structure
and cofactors requirement for activation: classical, novel, and atypical PKCs. Recently, PKC
family isoforms have been the focus of intense research, and recognized as therapeutic targets

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.29

in anticancer drug development. Diterpenoids are commonly found in the Plectranthus spp., and
have a widespread spectrum of biological activity, namely anticancer properties. The diterpenoid
7α-acetoxy-6β-hydroxyroyleanone (AHR) isolated from P. grandidentatus displays low
cytotoxicity and the basic requirements approaches for the development of pharmaceutical
formulations based on AHR as a lead. These AHR features includes an extraction optimization
and structural and thermal properties characterization. These features suggest that AHR can be
used as a lead for drug development. Considering this, a small library of abietane derivatives was
tested for their ability to activate PKC isoforms from classical (alpha, α; beta, β), novel (delta, d;
epsilon, e) and atypical (zeta, z) subfamilies, using a previously developed yeast-based screening
assay to search for modulators of PKC isoforms. The results obtained revealed potent activators
of PKC family proteins, namely: a selective activator of PKCd, the 7α-acetoxy-6β-benzoyloxy-12O-benzoylroyleanone (Roy-Bz). The patented diterpenoid RoyBz was prepared using AHR as
starting material. Roy-Bz potently inhibited the proliferation of colon cancer cells by inducing a
PKCd-dependent mitochondrial apoptotic pathway involving caspase-3 activation. The results
indicate that Roy-Bz targets drug-resistant cancer stem cells, in HCT116 colon cancer cells,
preventing tumor dissemination and recurrence. Moreover, these findings support a tumour
suppressive function of PKCd in colon cancer. Overall, these results point to promising activators
of PKCs with high potency and isoform-selectivity that may emerge from the exploitation of this
new family of abietane diterpenoids. Molecular docking studies are currently ongoing to further
identify new selective abietane diterpenoids as new PKC modulators.
Keywords: Cancer, protein kinase C, diterpenoids, Plectranthus
Presenting author profile
P. Rijo is a Chemist (1999), MSc (2003) and Ph.D. (2011) in Medicinal Chemistry. She has
published more than 60 full papers in peer-reviewed international journals, 2 international patents
and 14 awards.

P18 - EVIDENCE FOR ALTERED LIPID RAFT COMPOSITION AND SYNAPTIC PLASTICITY
IN A RAT MODEL OF MTLE
Andreia Bento-Oliveira1, Pereira P3, Amaro-Leal A3, Diana Cunha-Reis1,2,3
1 - Centro de Química e Bioquímica, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, 2 - Biosystems &
Integrative Sciences Institute (BioISI), Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa,
Portugal; 3 - Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal

THEME 3 PHYSIOLOGY OF STRESS
P07 - IS VENOARTERIAL REFLEX AGE DEPENDENT?

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.30

Clemente Rocha1; Henrique Silva1,2; Hugo Ferreira3; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1,2
1 - Universidade Lusófona CBIOS - Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies,
Av Campo Grande, 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc Depart - Lisboa, Portugal; 3 Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of
Sciences – IBEB Institute for Biophysics and Biomedical Engineering
Recent studies identified a contralateral response observed in the veno arterial reflex in the test
limb, both in animals and humans. This adaptative reflex is known for a long time but its
mechanistic explanation is still unclear. In the present study we assessed this reflex as a function
of age. 8 healthy volunteers (mean 50.13 ± 6.17 yo) from both sexes, were submitted after
informed written consent, to a leg lowering manoeuvre while lying in a supine position. The leg
to evoke the Venoarteriolar Reflex (VAR) was randomly selected while the other was used as
control. The experiment consisted in three phases, a 10 minute baseline (Phase I) period, a 10
minute leg pending challenge (Phase II), and finally a 10 minute recovery (Phase III). Recordings
were performed in both legs with laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) and photoplethysmography
(PPG) with sensors in second and first toes, respectively. Signals were decomposed in its
oscillatory components with the Morlet wavelet transform (WT). A p<0.05 was chosen for
statistical comparisons. Both technologies revealed that the VAR manoeuvre promoted a
significant perfusion reduction in the tested limb, also in the control foot as previously observed
in younger individuals. A similar evolution of LDF components is depicted in both young and old
individuals although less pronounced in the later. Results might suggest that this reflex resists
fairly well to ageing, at least when no significant vascular impairment (e.g diabetes or other
vascular failure) is present in the lower limb.
Keyword: venoarteriolar reflex, laser Doppler flowmetry, photoplethysmography, wavelet
transform, vascular regulation
Presenting author profile
Clemente has a degree in Computer Engineering from ISPGAYA and MSc in Computer
Engineering (ISCTE-IUL). He has dedicated an important part of his activity to Naturopathy
(General Course of Naturopathy and Holistic Traditional Sciences - IMT). He is currently Ph.D.
student in the doctoral program in Health Sciences at U Lusófona, where he concluded an
advanced training in Clinical Trials.

P08 - PERFUSION IS SEX RELATED BUT RESPONSE TO MASSAGE EVOKES THE SAME
HEMODYNAMIC ADAPTATION IN BOTH SEXES – RESULTS FROM AN EXPLORATORY
FACTOR ANALYSIS
João Gregório1; Henrique Silva1,2; Clemente Rocha1; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1,2
1 - Universidade Lusófona, School of Health Sc & Technologies, CBiOS (Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies), Campo Grande 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc Depart - Lisboa, Portugal

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.31

Microcirculatory regulation still presents many unanswered questions. Gender-based perfusion
differences are known and partially attributed to different autonomic/myogenic vascular activities.
Effleurage, a common massage technique, evokes similar responses in healthy volunteers from
both sexes, no matter the known perfusion differences. In this study we assess the gender
differences in the lower limb microcirculation using massage as the vasoactive stressor. 32 young
healthy subjects (19.8 ± 1.5 y.o.,16 females,16 males) were selected after informed consent. The
protocol was applied on a randomly chosen limb, the other serving as control. Data was collected
after 10 min resting (Phase I - baseline); during 5 min proximal massage (ankle to knee) (Phase
II); and during recovery (10min Phase III). Perfusion was assessed by Laser Doppler Flowmetry
(LDF) on the plantar side of the second toe in both limbs. LDF signals were then decomposed
into their spectral components - cardiac, respiratory, myogenic, sympathetic, endothelial NOdependent, endothelial NO-independent - with the wavelet transform (WT). Mann-Whitney and
Wilcoxon signed rank tests were used to assess significance of gender differences (p<0.05).
Spearman correlation and Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) were used to correlate variables. At
baseline, perfusion differences were significantly higher in males (p=0.015). These differences
seem to be mitigated during the massage protocol, reappearing in the recovery phase (p=0.037).
Different correlations for males and females in baseline LDF components were identified (e.g.
sympathetic signal only significantly correlates with the myogenic signal in females while in males
it also correlates with cardiac, respiratory, and endothelial NO-dependent). EFA returned 4 factors
for both genders in Phase II. In females, changes through phases seem to be induced by the
interplay between myogenic, sympathetic, blood pressure and endothelial NO-dependent
components. However, in males, Phase II shows heart rate and myogenic component loading in
factor 1, with the cardiac and respiratory having less importance than in females. A different
baseline physiology, determined by sex, seems to involve a different homeostatic adaptation
when a stress factor like effleurage changes local perfusion. A deeper insight into these
mechanisms, using other experimental conditions, is needed for a substantial understanding on
the effect of gender on microcirculatory regulation.
Keywords: Microcirculatory regulation, gender differences, effleurage, laser Doppler flowmetry,
Exploratory Factor Analysis

THEME 4 BY WAY OF THE SKIN
P09 - ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPACT OF ORAL INTAKE OF THE PROBIOTIC KEFIR IN
CUTANEOUS HEALTH
Emilia Alves1; Patricia Rijo1; Luis Rodrigues1; Catarina Rosado1
1 - CBIOS- Universidade Lusófona de Humanidades e Tecnologias
The regular intake of probiotics has been linked to beneficial effects on cutaneous health and skin
barrier function, particularly in cases of atopic dermatitis. Kefir is a probiotic obtained from milk

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.32

fermentation with grains formed by a matrix of polysaccharides and proteins densely populated
by acid-lactic and acid-acetic bacteria and yeast that live in symbiotic association. Its bioactivity
seems to be, at least partially, linked to the action of organic, lactic, and acetic acids released
during fermentation that have some anti-inflammatory activity.
This study aims to evaluate in vivo by non-invasive methods the cutaneous impact in healthy and
atopic individuals of kefir oral intake, thus contributing to the consolidation of methodologies for
studying the skin effects of probiotic foods.
During 6 weeks, a group of healthy and atopic volunteers daily drank 100ml of kefir
(tfermentation=24h, T=20ºC). A model of induction of cutaneous irritation using SLS on the forearm
was used to assess its impact on skin barrier at baseline and after 6 weeks, as well as periodic
skin evaluation by bioengineering methodologies (hydration, pH, and transepidermal water loss
(TEWL)) on three anatomical areas- forehead, forearm and leg. The impact on the skin barrier
function caused by SLS application was measured by TEWL using a Tewameter® TM300 (CK
Electronics, Germany) and colorimetry. Measurements of skin colour were performed with a
ChromaMeter CR300 (Minolta, Japan) using the L*a*b system, where skin erythema is reflected
on a*.
Results show an impact in the skin parameters and irritation capacity of SLS, especially in the
atopic group. Although based on a small number of volunteers, this study confirms the interest of
the methodology to assess probiotic impact in skin barrier function of both healthy and atopic
subjects. The work will be continued with an increased number of volunteers to further establish
the benefits of kefir consumption.
This work is financed by national funds through the FCT - Foundation for Science and
Technology, I.P., under the project UID / DTP / 04567/2019.
Keywords: Skin, kefir, probiotic, SLS irritation model
Presenting author profile
Catarina Rosado has received her Ph.D. at Cardiff University, UK. She is currently an Associate
Professor at ECTS of Universidade Lusófona. She has established her research at CBIOSUniversidade Lusófona, leading the Development of Delivery Systems Group. Her research
interests are focused on transdermal formulations and in strategies to assess efficacy and safety
of innovative ingredients.

P10 - TOWARDS THE MURINE MICROVASCULAR SPECTRAL PROFILE – EXPLORING
THE EFFECTS OF ATENOLOL UNDER KETAMINE-XYLAZINE ANESTHESIA
Henrique Silva1,2; Étienne Roux3; Alain-Pierre Gadeau3; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1,2
1 - Universidade Lusófona, School of Health Sc & Technologies, CBiOS (Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies), Campo Grande 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 -

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.33

Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc Depart - Lisboa, Portugal; 3 - U
Bordeaux & INSERM, U1034, Adaptation cardiovasculaire à l'ischémie, F-33600, Pessac,
France
Murine models are very useful for the characterization of microcirculatory function. Recently,
baseline laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) signal recordings have allowed the tentative proposal of
the spectral microcirculation profile consisting of the same components (cardiac, respiratory,
myogenic, sympathetic, NO-dependent and NO-independent endothelial) found in human. Still,
this proposal requires confirmation using stimuli specifically targeting individual components. Our
objective was the characterization of the murine spectral microcirculatory reactivity to atenolol
(AT). A group of six C57/BL6 male mice under a ketamine (K, 137.5 mg/kg) and xylazine (X, 11
mg/kg) mixture received two IP doses of AT (2.5 mg/kg). Animal experiments were performed in
accordance with the EU guidelines on animal welfare and complied with principles and standards
for reporting animal experiments. Perfusion was assessed with LDF, collected on a random
hindlimb and decomposed with the wavelet transform (WT). For each component the dominant
frequency and amplitude ratio were assessed. Heart rate (HR) and respiratory rate (RR) were
also assessed. Both AT doses significantly increased perfusion and HR, however no changes
were noted for the RR. Both doses significantly increased the cardiac dominant frequency and
decreased the myogenic dominant frequency. The cardiac ratio decreased but only significantly
so after the second dose, whereas the sympathetic ratio increased with the first dose and
decreased with the second. The myogenic and endothelial ratios increased with both doses,
although without significance. Although no vasoactive effect is attributed to AT, its concurrent
administration with KX seems to result in a perfusion increase due to myogenic-endothelial
increase despite the increase in vascular sympathetic activity. These results seem to suggest the
usefulness of the administration of AT under anaesthesia to better characterize the murine
microcirculatory spectral profile.
Keywords: microcirculation, murine model, laser Doppler flowmetry, spectral organization,
atenolol, ketamine-xylazine
Presenting author profile
Ph.D. in Health Sciences, Assistant Professor at U Lusófona (School of Health Sciences &
Technologies). Microcirculation is his main research area, from the development of physiological
models to study its normal function and adaptation mechanisms, to the mathematical modelling
of related quantitative descriptors. The non-invasive assessment of skin properties, within socalled experimental dermatology, are also within his scope.

P11 - STUDYING IRRITATION AND INFLAMMATION BY NON-INVASIVE FLOW RELATED
VARIABLES
Ana Macedo1; Inês Antunes1; Israa Negmeldin1; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1
1 - Universidade Lusófona, School of Health Sc & Technologies, CBiOS (Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies), Campo Grande 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.34

Alteration of skins’ "barrier "efficiency begins with irritation (redness, discomfort and other
symptoms) progressing to inflammation [1]. To date the physiological differences between
inflammation and skin irritation are poorly characterized. This work aims to elucidate the
mechanisms involved in primary skin reactions, using state-of-the-art non-invasive technologies
in vivo. Skin “barrier” was assessed by transepidermal water loss (TEWL). Laser Doppler
Flowmetry (LDF) and Tissue Viability Imager (TiVI) were used to assess skin microcirculation. Six
healthy volunteers of both sexes, aged 21-32, were selected upon informed written consent.
Tape-stripping (TS) and contact under occlusion with methyl nicotinate (MN, 0.1 M) were used as
challengers. Measurements were taken prior and after. TEWL varied from 5-12 (g/m2/h) for the
volunteers. No clear trend was able to be identified. LDF values for MN showed an increase in
flow from 9.54 ± 0.56 to 30.14 ± 1.19 AU in males and from 4.60 ± 0.95 to 31.95 ± 0.66 AU in
females. Values collected for TS showed an increase in flow from 11.67 ± 1.07 to 36.55 ± 10.11
AU in males and from 5.06 ± 0.70 to 32.17 ± 6.80 AU in females. Furthermore, the increase in
perfusion was faster in males (12 min) compared to females (15 min).
TiVI showed an average increase in the local concentration of red blood cells from 54.6 ± 13.3 to
70.7 ± 19.9 UA and 48.5 ± 5.12 to 62.2 ± 14.2 UA. Increment in ratio was 1.3 for both TS and MN,
showing evidence that the response in vasodilation is similar, even though the stimuli are different.
This work showed that inflammation and irritation have a diverging response observed by TiVI
and LDF. Inflammation seems to affect the deeper blood vessels detected by LDF, but not by
TiVI. This work showed imaging and non-invasive techniques combined provide are useful to
provide complementary information to characterise skin irritation and inflammation.
Acknowledgments: The authors wish to express thanks to all the volunteers.
References
[1] Fluhr, JW, et al., Skin Pharmacol Physiol, 2008, 21(3): 124-135.
Keywords: Inflammation, irritation, tape stripping, methyl nicotinate, laser doppler flowmetry,
transepidermal water loss, tissue viability imager
Presenting author profile
Ana holds a Ph.D. in Pharmacy (University of South Australia, Australia). Her research interests
include development and characterisation of nanoformulations for effective transdermal drug
delivery, understanding the transport of molecules within the skin and nail by means of imaging
and quantitative techniques.

P12 - SKIN COMPATIBILITY ASSESSMENT OF PLGA-NANOPARTICLE LOADED
HYDROGELS FOR WOUND HEALING
João Vieira1; Patrícia Filipe1,2; Ana S. Macedo1,3; Catarina Rosado1; Pedro Fonte1,3,4

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.35

1 - CBIOS - Universidade Lusófona Research Center for Biosciences & Health Technologies,
Campo Grande 376, 1749–024 Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Alcalá, Ctra. Madrid-Barcelona Km. 33.600, 28871 Alcalá de Henares, Madrid,
Spain; 3 - LAQV, REQUIMTE, Department of Chemical Sciences—Applied Chemistry Lab,
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Porto, Rua de Jorge Viterbo Ferreira, 228, 4050-313 Porto,
Portugal; 4 - iBB-Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, Department of Bioengineering,
Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade de Lisboa, 1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal
The skin protects the body from infection by microorganisms and dehydration. When the barrier
is damaged, a wound healing process is started. Acute wounds heal in 12 weeks, whereas chronic
wounds need months [1]. Hydrogels are hydrophilic molecular networks produced by the physical
or chemical cross-linking of polymers and have been used in wound dressings. Polymer
nanoparticles may carry and release growth factors in a controlled or sustained manner. In this
work, we propose the use of PVA/alginate hydrogels loaded with PLGA nanoparticles as carriers
for growth factors for wound healing. Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) was used as the matrix
of the nanoparticles and PVA was the surfactant. Glycerine and urea were also included in the
gels to improve flow properties, healing, and as preservatives. PLGA nanoparticles were
produced following a protocol developed by our group [2]. Then, sodium alginate, glycerine, and
urea were added, and the hydrogels were formed after freeze-thawing cycles.
It was observed that the hydrogel production method did not change the particle size of 300 nm
and obtained a narrow PdI of 0.25. The ATR-FTIR analysis showed an interaction between PLGA
and glycerine (1075 cm-1) and urea (1650 cm-1). Skin compatibility was assessed by Laser
Doppler Flowmetry, and values were similar for water and the gels containing no glycerine, 5%
glycerine, and 10% glycerine (16.7, 11.0, 17.6, 13.0 AU, respectively), showing evidence of not
causing erythema. In contrast, the positive control methyl nicotinate showed an increase in
flowmetry to 124.8 AU.
Overall, we obtained a stable and biocompatible polymer-nanoparticle based hydrogel for wound
healing purposes. Such a system is intended to load growth factors. In vitro and in vivo
performance will be evaluated in the future.
Acknowledgments: This work was financed by FEDER - Fundo Europeu de Desenvolvimento
Regional funds through the COMPETE 2020 - Operational Programme for Competitiveness and
Internationalization (POCI), and by Portuguese funds through FCT - Fundação para a Ciência e
a Tecnologia (FCT) in the framework of the project POCI-01-0145-FEDER-032610 - PTDC/MECDER/32610/2017. It was also supported by FCT under the project UID/DTP/04567/2019.
References:
[1] Boateng JS, et al., J Pharm Sci, 2008, 97(8): 2892-2923.
[2] Fonte P, et al., Biomacromolecules, 2014, 15(10): 3753-3765

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.36

Keywords: Hydrogel, skin compatibility, nanoparticle, wound healing, freeze-thawing
Presenting author profile
Currently, Patrícia Filipe is a Ph.D. student in the Health Sciences at Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies (CBIOS), Escola de Ciências e Tecnologias da Saúde Universidade Lusófona in partnership with the University of Alcalá de Henares. Her work focuses
on the regeneration of human tissues and wound healing. She has several oral and poster
presentations in scientific meetings.

THEME 5 PHYSIOLOGICAL INFORMATICS
P13 - OPTIMAL FEATURE EXTRACTION WITH MACHINE LEARNING FOR EMOTIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
Miguel S. Joaquim1,2; Rita Maçorano2; Francisca Canais2; Rafael Ramos2; Ana L. Fred1; Hugo
A. Ferreira2
1 - Instituto Superior Técnico; 2 - Instituto de Biomédica e Biofísica
Human emotions have always been a topic of great interest, especially due to their importance
as a tool for communication between people. Nowadays, emotional analysis is also crucial
regarding the way users interact with new technologies. By understanding the user’s feelings, a
digital interface can adapt itself to provide a more pleasant and useful experience.
In this work, 7 different emotions were studied: neutral, amusement, tenderness, sadness,
disgust, anger, and fear, from 21 subjects, consisting of both males and females. Each subject
was shown one commercial per emotion, in random order.
During the procedure, raw photoplethysmography and two-channel pre-frontal
electroencephalography signals were collected for each individual using EmotAi’s wearable
headband and physiological computing platform (EmotAi, Hong Kong). Convolutional Neural
Networks were implemented in Python using TensorFlow to classify the acquired signals with raw
data as input. All inputs were classified according to the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule.
Afterwards, correlation values between conventional features extracted from the raw inputs and
the final classification were computed by adding noise to the input and checking output changes.
This was done to assess the effect of each metric on the final value of the emotional
classification. The most common features from the literature were considered: theta, alpha, beta
and gamma band powers, asymmetry indexes, phase synchronization indexes, and statistical
features.
This approach achieved average accuracies and f1-scores of 82% and 0.82 for Positive Affect,
and 84% and 0.82 for Negative Affect, respectively. The features with the most significant
correlations were the alpha band power, and the asymmetry and phase synchronization indexes.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.37

The obtained results show that the extracted features seem to match the ones apprehended by
the neural network, hence endorsing their validity for emotional studies.
Keywords: Emotions, photoplethysmography, electroencephalography, positive and negative
affect schedule, machine learning, feature extraction
Presenting author profile
Miguel Santos Joaquim is studying for his master’s degree in Biomedical Engineering at Instituto
Superior Técnico (IST), where he has been enrolled since 2014. Following his interest in Affective
Computing, he is currently finishing his master thesis in machine learning for emotional analysis
using physiological signals in a cooperation project between the Instituto de Telecomunicações
at IST and the Instituto de Biomédica e Biofísica (IBEB) at Faculdade de Ciências da
Universidade de Lisboa.

P14 - MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING – AN INTERESTING TOOL TO QUANTITATIVELY
ASSESS VASCULAR TOPOGRAPHY
Henrique Silva1,2; Rafaela Francisco2; Hugo Ferreira3; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1,2
1 - Universidade Lusófona, School of Health Sc & Technologies, CBiOS (Research Center for
Biosciences and Health Technologies), Campo Grande 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc Depart - Lisboa, Portugal; 3 Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of Sciences, IBEB Institute Bioph Biomed Engineering, Lisboa,
Portugal
The study of vessel topography is of great importance in vascular medicine since vascular
abnormalities or dysmorphic features are present in many developmental and cardiovascular
disorders, as well as in ageing, even when no clinical manifestations are present. Branching
regions of any vascular tree is a common site for architectural dysmorphia and dysfunction due
to well-known biophysical factors. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a powerful tool for the
purpose of anatomical description, although somewhat underexplored in vascular medicine,
particularly in the quantitative characterization of vascular branching topography. Our aim was to
quantitatively describe the branching topography of large blood vessels in the wrist region using
MRI. Four healthy subjects (40.5 ± 17.2 y.o.) participated in this study after giving informed
consent. MRI scans of a randomly chosen wrist were performed for each subject in a 1.5T scanner
(Magnetom Avanto, Siemens, Erlangen) with an 8-channel wrist coil. Scans included a 3D T2*weighted gradient-echo sequence with voxel size 312x312x300 mm3. From these MRI scans 16
bifurcating blood vessels (diameter of 18 ± 11 px) were assessed using ImageJ®, which allowed
the calculation of several branching parameters – branching angle, angular asymmetry, area
ratio, optimality ratios, asymmetry ratio, branching coefficient, length-to-diameter ratio, junctional
exponent deviation. Linear correlations between these parameters were tested (p<0.05). The
branching coefficient was found to be positively correlated with the area and optimality ratios and
negatively correlated with the junctional exponent deviation. Furthermore, the branching vessel

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.38

diameter was also positively correlated with the junctional exponent deviation parameter. These
results suggest that MRI is a useful tool for the purpose of characterizing vascular topography,
which adds further value to this already versatile technique.
Keywords: MRI, vascular architecture, topography parameter
Presenting author profile
Ph.D. in Health Sciences, Assistant Professor at U Lusófona (School of Health Sciences &
Technologies). Microcirculation is his main research area, from the development of physiological
models to study its normal function and adaptation mechanisms to the mathematical modelling of
related quantitative descriptors. The non-invasive assessment of skin properties, within the socalled experimental dermatology are also within his scope.

P15 - WAVELET TRANSFORM COMPONENTS ANALYSIS OF PERFUSION OBTAINED
FROM PHOTOPLETHYSMOGRAPHY SIGNALS IN HUMAN
Clemente Rocha1; Henrique Silva1,2; Hugo Ferreira3; Luis Monteiro Rodrigues1,2
1 - Universidade Lusófona CBIOS - Research Center for Biosciences and Health Technologies,
Av Campo Grande, 376, 1749-024, Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of
Pharmacy, Pharmacol. Sc Depart - Lisboa, Portugal; 3 - Universidade de Lisboa, Faculty of
Sciences - Institute of Biophysics and Biomedical Engineering
The wavelet transform analysis (WT) of optical phenomena gathered from techniques such as
laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) is well known, and regarded as a useful mechanistic assessment
refinement. In the present study we applied this strategy to one other technology,
photoplethysmography (PPG) and compared it with equivalent signals obtained under the same
conditions with LDF. Twenty-four young healthy volunteers (19.9 ± 1.7 years old) from both sexes,
were submitted to a massage protocol (applied in the proximal direction) in one randomly selected
limb, serving the other as control. The protocol included three phases, a 10 minute baseline
(Phase I) period, a 5 minute massage (Phase II), and a 10 minute recovery (Phase III) recordings
with LDF and PPG, obtained from both limbs. A p<0.05 was adopted). WT analysis of LDF and
PPG oscillatory components revealed interesting differences, mostly regarding sympathetic and
myogenic components, which seem to play a central role in the process. LDF and PPG were also
able to detect the regional circulatory adaptation that takes place in both test and control limbs
with massage, suggesting a regional circulatory adaptation. This analysis seems to confirm that
these two optical technologies do not measure the same phenomena since they seem to operate
at different depths. Nevertheless WT analysis confirms that in both technologies, under the
present conditions, the observed myogenic activity increase, which associated to a sympathetic
decreased in both signals, could contribute to the increased perfusion observed during massage,
both in the tested and control feet.
Keywords: hind limb massage, LDF, PPG, wavelet transform, microcirculation

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.39

Presenting author profile
Degree in Computer Engineering from ISPGAYA and MSc in Computer Engineering (ISCTEIUL). He has dedicated an important part of his activity to Naturopathy (General Course of
Naturopathy and Holistic Traditional Sciences - IMT). Current Ph.D. student in the doctoral
program in Health Sciences at U Lusófona where he concluded an advanced training in Clinical
Trials.

P16 - ASSESSING THE EXPERIENCE OF EATING CHOCOLATE USING PHYSIOLOGICAL
SIGNALS
Justyna Zasada2; Carlos Moreira1; Daniel Rocha1; Hugo Alexandre Ferreira1
1 - Instituto de Biofisica e Engenharia Biomedica, Faculdade de Ciencias da Universidade de
Lisboa, 1649-004 Lisboa, Portugal; 2 - Lodz University of echnology, International Faculty of
Engineering, 90-924 Lodz, Poland
Eating is a complex behaviour, which engages not only the digestive system, but to a larger extent
it influences the mental state. In this study, the emotional and cognitive responses of eating a
variety of chocolates were assessed, as well as brand recognition, based on flavour and wrapping
of each chocolate. The experiment included 3 types of chocolates: hazelnut, cherry liqueur and
coconut.
The study enrolled 40 healthy subjects (aged 24 ± 7 years old) divided into 4 gender-matched
groups: 1 - blindfolded with wrapped chocolates, 2 - open eyes with wrapped chocolates, 3 blindfolded with unwrapped chocolates and 4 - open eyes with unwrapped chocolates. Twochannel pre-frontal (Fp1 and Fp2) electroencephalography (EEG) and photoplethysmography
(PPG, blood-volume pulse) signals of each subject were acquired using EmotAi’s wearable
headband and physiological computing platform (EmotAi, Hong Kong). These physiological
signals were then processed to derive emotional valence from the EEG’s alpha band
interhemispheric asymmetry and heart rate from the PPG signal.
Heart rate and emotional valence were normalized to baseline values to compute indices of
physiological response to different stimuli. The average HR index for all subjects increased by 4.4
± 6.0% when eating any chocolate, whereas the cherry liqueur chocolate caused the greatest
increase in HR (30.5%).
The majority of subjects chose hazelnut as their favourite, and for each group the highest value
of EV was on their favourite chocolate. Groups eating wrapped chocolates had 77% higher EV
(more positive valence) after eating compared to unwrapped chocolate, as well as a longer-lasting
effect in increased HR. In addition,95% of the subjects were able to recognize each chocolate
regardless of the group to which they were assigned, and 85% recognized the brand.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.40

This study enabled to better understand the eating pattern based on different factors: the
preference for the chocolate, eating with eyes closed/open, and wrapped or unwrapped
chocolates.
Keywords: chocolate, emotional valence, heart rate, neuromarketing
Presenting author profile
Justyna Zasada is a Biomedical Engineering student, currently in her last year of the bachelor’s
degree at Lodz University of Technology. In the previous semester, she had the chance to study
at the University of Lisbon during Erasmus exchange, which gave her a new experience and a
fresh view on the biomedical field. Interested in neuromarketing and computer graphics, she often
combines these areas with the projects in her studies.

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.41

AUTHORS INDEX
Adriana Costa, 24
Alain-Pierre Gadeau, 21, 33
Ana Fred, 20, 22, 37
Ana Gouveia, 14
Ana Júlio, 20
Ana Macedo, 18, 34, 35
Ana S Flórido, 15
Ana S. Fernandes, 15, 20, 27
António Banganho, 17
Bruno Sousa, 24
Carlos Moreira, 14, 40
Carlos Muñoz-Bravo, 11
Carolina Amorim, 14
Catarina Rosado, 18, 20, 32, 35
César Lima, 8
Cíntia Ferreira-Pêgo, 11, 24
Clemente Rocha, 12, 28, 31, 39
Daniel Rocha, 14, 40
Diana Prata, 8
Dilan Deniz Koyuncu, 27
Dolores Corella, 11
Duarte M. F. Prazeres, 20
Emilia Alves, 32
Emilio Ros, 11
Erica Wehrwein, 13
Étienne Roux, 33
Fernando Arós, 11
Francisca Canais, 37
Francisco Rego, 18
Gonçalo Cosme, 8
Hasan İlker Coban, 16
Henrique Silva, 12, 18, 21, 26, 28, 31, 33,
38, 39
Hugo Ferreira, 12, 14, 21, 23, 28, 31, 37,
38, 39, 40
Hugo Silva, 17, 20, 22
Inês Antunes, 34
Ines Batinic-Haberle, 15, 27
Israa Negmeldin, 34
Joana Rodrigues, 24
João G. Costa, 15, 27
João Gregório, 13, 31
João Valente, 20, 22
João Vieira, 35

doi: 10.19277/bbr.16.2.218

Jordi Salas-Salvadó, 11
José Manuel Santos-Lozano, 11
Justyna Zasada, 40
Katja Brodmann, 8
Leyla Sahin, 27
Luis Serra-Majem, 11
Luis Monteiro Rodrigues, 10, 12, 13, 18, 21, 26,
31, 33, 34, 38, 39
Maira Bes-Rastrollo, 11
Marcelino Santos, 17
Margarida Florindo, 10, 25
Mariana Abreu, 22
Matilde Castro, 15
Miguel Fiol, 11
Miguel Ruiz-Canela, 11
Miguel S. Joaquim, 37
Mónica Costa, 8
Montserrat Fitó, 11
Muaz Belviranli, 9, 16
Nancy Babio, 11
Nilsel Okudan, 9, 16
Nuno G. Oliveira, 15, 27
Nuno Saraiva, 15, 27
Ozge Selin Cevik, 27
Patrícia Bota, 20
Patrícia Filipe, 18, 35
Patricia Rijo, 29, 32
Paula Carvalho, 14
Pedro Fonte, 18, 20, 35
Pedro Pestana Da Silva, 23
Pedro Rosa, 8
Rafael Ramos, 37
Rafaela Francisco, 21, 38
Ramon Estruch, 11
Rita Caparica, 20
Rita Maçorano, 37
Salette Reis, 20
Sema Sayharman, 9
Sérgio Nuno, 26, 28
Sofia A. Costa Lima, 20
Tânia Santos De Almeida, 20
Vânia Tavares, 8
Xavier Pintó, 11

Physioma 2019 – Abstracts Book p.42

