See discussions, stats, and author proﬁles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322540055

Survey of EEG-based biometric authentication
Conference Paper · January 2018
DOI: 10.1109/ICAwST.2017.8256471

CITATIONS

READS

0

139

3 authors:
Isuru Jayarathne

Michael Cohen

The University of Aizu

The University of Aizu

3 PUBLICATIONS 9 CITATIONS

169 PUBLICATIONS 820 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

SEE PROFILE

Senaka Amarakeerthi
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
20 PUBLICATIONS 24 CITATIONS
SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

EEG based Virtual Classrooms View project

Audio Narrowcasting and Privacy for Multipresent Avatars on Workstations and Mobile Phones View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Isuru Jayarathne on 11 February 2018.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded ﬁle.

2017 IEEE 8th International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST 2017)

Survey of EEG-Based Biometric Authentication
Isuru Jayarathne & Michael Cohen

Senaka Amarakeerthi

Spatial Media Group
University of Aizu
Aizu-Wakamatsu, Fukushima 965-8580; Japan
E·mail: {d8191101, mcohen}@u-aizu.ac.jp

Faculty of Technology
University of Sri Jayewardenepura
Gangodawila, Nugegoda; Sri Lanka
E·mail: senaka@sjp.ac.lk

Abstract—User authentication systems based on EEG (electroencephalography) is currently popular, marking an inﬂection
point in the ﬁeld. Recently, the scientiﬁc community has been
making tremendous attempts towards perceiving uniqueness of
brain signal patterns. Several types of methodical approaches
have been proposed and prototyped to analyze EEG data
with various signal-processing methods and pattern-recognition
algorithms. Even though there are many stimulation methods to
produce reasonable distinctiveness between subjects, optimization
and lowering task complexity are still desirable from technoeconomic points of view. With recent technological advancement
of EEG signal capturing devices, the process is getting comparatively simpler as devices are capable of providing better
portability with reduced calibration time. However, most detailed
analysis suggests that a minimal number of most appropriate
channels should be selected for better results, even if a system
is equipped with the most advanced hardware. Researchers are
now focusing on implementing computationally low cost systems
with better accuracy, regardless of complexity of the tasks. This
paper is a review of several approaches, providing an overview of
crucial design considerations in handling EEG data for extended
accuracy and practical applicability to authentication.
Index Terms—EEG, biometrics, pattern-recognition.

I. I NTRODUCTION
A security system is a prominent method of providing
a form of protection for any kind of asset. Most security
systems have a sequential process to achieve better protection.
Authentication is a part of such sequential processes, verifying
that a user has privilege to access a system. There are several
types of methods used, including knowledge, possessions,
and biometric attributes. The knowledge can be described as
“something you know,” such as a user name and password
pair. Possessions refers to “something you have,” such as smart
cards, RFID tags, certiﬁcates, etc. Biometrics can be described
as encoding “something you are,” such as ﬁngerprints, palmprints, retina scans, voice proﬁles, etc. representations [1].
Compared with other methods, biometric authentication provides better reliability, mobility, and more effortless use.
Authentication systems currently in use have several vulnerabilities. As an example, physical devices such as smart cards,
RFID tags, dongles, etc. can be stolen, misplaced, misused,
or damaged. On the other hand, conventional authentication
methods, which involve knowledge such as username and
password, can also be penetrated by coercion, besides credentials being vulnerable to being stolen, disﬁgured, or forgotten.
Even though biometrics cannot be stolen, some systems can

be easily misled with forgery or fake replicas. Also, some protection procedures can be overridden by spooﬁng and forcing.
Fingerprints and palm-prints can be duplicated, and iris scans
can be tricked by high resolution images. Such weaknesses
suggest how conventional security systems become vulnerable, even with simple attack tactics, and such considerations
highlight the importance of considering new strategies which
can prevent unauthorized parties from entering a system.
With state of art of signal processing and machine learning
techniques, researchers are exploring novel styles of authentication using electroencephalography (EEG). EEG is a robust
biometric trait, and EEG-based authentication is safer than
older techniques. This paper mainly reviews four EEG authentication studies. Additionally, several other studies are brieﬂy
discussed, comparing results and indicating out the most
sensitive and important design considerations, which have
heavy interdependence with accuracy and user-friendliness.
II. U SER I DENTIFICATION VS . AUTHENTICATION
Ever since information started to be recorded and processed
in digital form, in ﬁelds such as health care, ﬁnance, education, and government, Securing information systems has
been vital. A so-called CIA triad (conﬁdentiality, integrity,
availability) model guides polices for information security
[2]. Contemporary information systems use various kinds of
security methods. Every security method includes an authentication process. Identiﬁcation is the process of presenting an
identity to a system, and authentication can be described as
the validation of such identity. For such validation process, as
mentioned above, some evidence should be provided [3], such
as knowledge, possession, or biometric attributes.
III. E LECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY
There are various techniques designed for capturing brain
activity, including Magnetencephalography (MEG), Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) [4], Positron Emission Tomography (PET),
and Electroencephalography (EEG) [5]. EEG is an electrophysiological monitoring method to record dynamics of electrical activity of a human brain. Unlike other techniques,
EEG is not terribly expensive, and is non-invasive and allows
completely passive recording.
Lately, EEG has become popular among researchers because
of recent technological advances of EEG signal capturing de-

978-1-5386-2965-9/17/$31.00 © 2017 IEEE
324

2017 IEEE 8th International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST 2017)
TABLE I
C ONSUMER - GRADE WIRELESS HEADSETS FOR EEG

TABLE II
F REQUENCY BANDS AND CORRESPONDING BRAIN STATES

DATA CAPTURE

Device name

Channels

Electrode

NeuroSky Mindwave

1

Dry

Muse

2

Dry

EMOTIV Insight

5

Dry

EMOTIV Epoc+

14

Wet

OpenBCI

16

Dry

mBrainTrain

24

Wet

ENOBIO 32

32

Dry

Cognionics Mobile72

64

Dry

vices. Compared to other brain experimentation devices, EEG
devices are reasonably priced and feature ease of calibration
and use. Unlike most of the brain signal capture techniques
mentioned above, specialized medical knowledge is not required to use EEG devices. Table I lists some consumer-grade
wireless EEG acquisition devices [6]. The most important
speciﬁcations of such a device are the number of electrode
channels, electrode type, brain lobes covered, calibration time,
portability, and customizability. For best results and for the
sake of convenience, a device should be selected based on the
particular application as well as affordability.
International standards have been established for electrode
placement on the skull of the human brain. Jasper et al.
proposed [7] the 10-20 system for the capture of EEG signals.
An extension of the 10-20 system, the so-called 10% system
or 10-10 system, was proposed by Chatrian et al. [8]. Oostenveld et al. proposed [9] the 10-5 system for high resolution
EEG signal acquisition. The devices in Table I are designed
according to these international electrode placement standards
and conventions.
EEG signals are normally described in terms of rhythmic
activity of brain waves. The amplitudes and frequencies of
signals change from one state to another. Five major frequency
bands have been identiﬁed. In increasing order of frequency,
they are called delta (δ), theta (θ), alpha (α), beta (β), and
gamma (γ). Table II describes the frequency bands and related
brain states [10]. Frequency band or bands are experimentally
chosen according to which brain state is being explored.
EEG signals can be contaminated by other electrobiological signals, such as those captured by an electrocardiogram
(ECG/EKG) generated in the heart, electromyogram (EMG)
signals generated in muscles, or electro-oculogram (EOG)
signals generated by eye movements [5]. Since EEG recording
devices are highly sensitive, captured EEG signals may be
corrupted with 50 or 60 Hz AC power line “hum” interference. However, line noise is normally not a problem because
considered frequencies usually lie below 50 Hz.

Identiﬁer

Frequency
band (Hz)

Brain state

Delta, δ

1−4

Primarily associated with
deep sleep.

Theta, θ

4−8

Appear as consciousness
slips towards drowsiness.

Alpha, α

8 − 13

Usually found over the occipital region. Indicates relaxed awareness without attention.

Beta, β

13 − 30

Associated with active
thinking and concentration.

Gamma, γ

30 − 100

Represent binding of different populations of neurons.

IV. EEG FOR U SER AUTHENTICATION
As noted above, biometric traits are more reliable and easier
to use in authentication systems compared to other methods.
Passwords, smart cards, and RFID tags can be forgotten or
stolen. Even though biometrics can overcome such problems,
conventional biometrics can be misused by coercion. However,
using EEG as a biometric trait has many potential advantages
over traditional biometrics:
•
•

•

•

A predeﬁned brain state which authenticates a system is
impossible to evoke by insistence or coercion.
No non-living brain can produce an EEG, which prevents
breaching an authentication system by assassinating a
user.
Even though most other biometric traits are visible, EEG
biometrics are invisible, making them uncapturable by
other parties [11].
If a brain state is selected for authentication, it can be
suppressed by a user in coercion situations [12].

Therefore, this kind of authentication system provides protection not only for the asset, but also for users. An EEG-based
biometric satisﬁes the requirements of universality, uniqueness, permanency, collectability, performance, acceptability,
and robustness to be accepted as a authentication method [13].
Generally, EEG-based authentication studies include several common steps, such as data capture, pre-processing,
feature extraction, and classiﬁcation or pattern recognition.
Also, accuracy of any system depends on several parameters,
such as complexity of task, number of electrodes, electrode
type, features, and classiﬁcation algorithms. In practice, task
complexity, preparation time, and processing time should be
reduced to ensure user-friendliness of a system.

978-1-5386-2965-9/17/$31.00 © 2017 IEEE
325

2017 IEEE 8th International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST 2017)
V. S ELECTED EEG-BASED B IOMETRIC AUTHENTICATION
S TUDIES
In this section, we highlight four studies representation of
this research area, selected partly because of their successfullness as measured by reported accuracy.
A. ERP → CC
Ruiz-Blondet et al. [11] introduced a protocol called CEREBRE, which uses EEG signals to authenticate a user. 400
images— 100 sine gratings, 100 low frequency words, 100
images of foods, and 100 celebrity faces— were used as
stimuli. Among those categories, an oddball stimuli category
also was included to further evolve the sought EEG pattern.
The experiment was performed with 50 participants. Brainvision Brainamp DC with 26 EEG electrodes and 3 EOG
electrodes was used to acquire data at 500 Hz sampling rate.
Event-Related Potentials (ERP) were ﬁltered with a band-pass
ﬁlter (1–55 Hz), and a simple discriminant function based on
normalized cross-correlation was used for classiﬁcation.
Results conﬁrm that, visual tasks activate middle occipital
electrodes. Both maximal (all channels, all classiﬁers) and
minimal (3 channels, 4 categories) classiﬁers showed 100%
accuracy, but the minimal classiﬁer showed maximum accuracy when all the trials were used. The results indicate
that the single-stimulus classiﬁers based on food and oddball
stimuli are the most accurate. Identity classiﬁcation based on
resting state EEG has shown extremely poor performance.
Authentication based on memory recall task (which some
studies call “pass-thoughts”) also showed poor performance,
due to the variable time taken to think. This study indicates
that up to at least 6 months, ERP biometric identiﬁcation does
not signiﬁcantly degrade.
B. PSD & COH → Mahalanobis distance & match-score
fusion
La Rocca et al. [14] suggested a method for ﬁnding distinctiveness based on EEG spectral coherence connectivity.
The basic idea is to use the information exchanged between
different areas of the brain to establish distinctiveness. The
proposed method was tested with a data set collected from 108
subjects during eyes-closed and -open resting state conditions.
EEG data was recorded using a 64-channel system with
sampling rate of 160 Hz. Data was down-sampled to 100 Hz
and extracted up to 50 Hz using an anti-aliasing low-pass
ﬁlter. Power spectral density (PSD) and spectral coherence
(COH) analysis methods were used to extract spectral features.
PSD is the frequency response of a random or periodic
signal, indicating average power distributed as a function of
frequency. COH quantiﬁes the level of synchrony between
two stationary signals at speciﬁc frequencies. Mahalanobis
distance-based classiﬁers and match-score fusion algorithms
were used separately to calculate distinctiveness. This analysis
was done over three different brain macro-areas (F: frontal, C:
central, P: parieto-occipital).
The single element classiﬁer with PSD eyes closed data
showed 90.49% accuracy for the P zone. The match-score

fusion algorithm showed 100% accuracy for COH features
of eyes-closed data in all zones and eyes-open in only the
frontal zone. This method is robust and highly accurate for
identifying people. Even though match-score fusion with COH
features shows better accuracy, COH requires EEG signals
to be (quasi)stationary, and analysis takes around 20 min. to
process. On conventional hardware, classiﬁcation performance
may not perform well with a large number of subjects (> 100).
C. CC → LDA
Chen et al. [12] proposed an authentication system based on
rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) stimuli. 29 participants
were recruited, and the BrainAmp ampliﬁer was used to
acquire EEG signals. Data collection was performed with both
wet and dry electrodes separately. A set of three symbols was
used as targets, and users were instructed to count the instances
among a stream of randomly generated trials. 600 trials,
consisting of 72 targets and 528 non-targets, were conducted
to collect EEG data. The signiﬁcant features were calculated
by point-biserial correlation coefﬁcients. Correlations were
transformed into z-scores for each subject using Fisher’s
transformation. Regularized linear discriminant analysis was
used to perform classiﬁcation of ERP components.
In single trial classiﬁcation scenarios, average accuracy
for 28- and 16-channel wet conﬁgurations were 87.8% and
85.9%, and for the 16-channel dry conﬁguration, it was 78.2%.
Both wet and dry electrode setups showed 100% accuracy
with 10.7 s and 27.0 s average login times respectively with
more trials. According to this study, knowledge-based methods
(introduced in the study) can successfully be adjusted to any
true acceptance rate (TAR) level according to required security
level. Low level of TAR reduces the time taken for a login
process. After the system has been trained for a new password,
no positive response is shown for the older one. The authors
note that a password can be successfully hidden in coercion
situations. However, the need for data calibration for each
subject limits the scope of applicability.
D. Cosine similarity → LDA
Chuang et al. [15] performed a task-wise method comparison to determine the best performing approach in terms
of usability and security. 15 subjects were recruited and
the NeuroSky MindSet (later replaced by MindWave) was
used to acquire data. The EEG headset has a single channel
placed on the frontal polar (Fp1) area on the head. Seven
tasks were performed, including breathing, simulated ﬁnger
movement, sport activity, singing/passage recitation, audio
listing, color identiﬁcation, and pass-thought. A questionnaire
was administered to check user friendliness of the tasks.
Only alpha and beta frequency bands were extracted, and
signals were ﬂattened in the time domain to simplify the
data into a single dimension. Cosine similarity of the vector
representation was used to quantify similarity between pairs of
signals. Similarities of signals within each subject and between
different subjects were checked. The k-nearest Neighbour (kNN) algorithm was used for classiﬁcation.

978-1-5386-2965-9/17/$31.00 © 2017 IEEE
326

2017 IEEE 8th International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST 2017)
Audio, sport, and color tasks showed the best classiﬁcation
accuracies. However, the proposed method showed 99% accuracy using custom task and custom acceptance thresholds
for each subject. According to results of the questionnaire,
the pass-thought task was the most difﬁcult to perform, and
breathing, audio, and color tasks were the easiest. This study
concluded that it is possible to achieve high accuracy even
with appealing user friendliness.
E. Other
Besides the studies discussed above, Table III summarizes some other studies with achieved accuracy and other
characteristics. Generally, accuracy of each system depends
highly on these aspects. Even if it is very hard to quantify
simplicity of tasks, relaxation is perhaps the simplest. Even
though complex tasks give better accuracy, relaxation is easiest
for users. Selected studies have different kinds of attributes,
such as different task(s), different numbers of channels, and
different algorithms to achieve better accuracy. Change of
accuracy according to these parameters is noted by this table. Palaniappan [16] and Ashby et al. [17] determined that
combination of several tasks increases accuracy by analyzing
across different numbers of task combinations. Riera et al. [18]
proposed an authentication system using combination of EEG
and ECG signals. Changes of the ECG signals when one is
in a coercion situation can be advantageous for discriminating
the situation. Even if the task is relaxation, this study achieves
higher accuracy than other studies which used same the task
because of the additional ECG channel. According to the
method proposed by Jayarathne et al. [19], it is possible to
authenticate a person by having them think of a particular
number. Compared to tasks used in other studies, such an
imagining task makes it easy to perform anywhere. Unlike
other studies, Yeom et al. [20] proposed a approach to evoke
unique EEG pattern using self- and non-self face images. EEG
patterns must be unique because each subject has their own
idiosyncratic response to self-face.
VI. D ISCUSSION
The experimental conclusions reviewed above further emphasize the notion that EEG signals can be used to implement
robust authentication systems. However, the best method is
still not obvious, since it depends on the required security level
and user friendliness. The parameters should be carefully engineered to implement a fairly good EEG-based authentication
system, as detailed below.
A. Task simplicity or complexity
Most of the studies surveyed reported that more robustness
and high accuracy can be achieved with higher task complexities [11][12][17], but higher task complexities make a system
less usable, because both authentication and system training
are highly time-consuming, which compromises an important
property of good authentication systems.

B. Number of channels and electrode type
As mentioned earlier, both consumer- and clinical-grade
headsets are used in this kind of research. Some studies
especially focus on accuracy changing against the number of
channels used [11]. Even though the number of channels has
less impact on accuracy, in case security is signiﬁcantly prioritized, a large number of channels ensures extra protection.
Fewer channels can be processed at reduced computational
power and provides extra user-friendliness [15]. Chen et al.
[12] reported that wet electrodes generally have better signal
quality compared to dry ones, but calibration time is higher.
C. Number of subjects and trials
Using more data points increases accuracy of classiﬁcation
algorithms. Chen et al. [12] conﬁrmed that by performing
single- and multi-trial classiﬁcation. According to the La
Rocca et al. [14] classiﬁcations, using fewer subjects provides
better accuracy than considering more subjects, as similar
subjects can be found in a large set. Therefore, systems which
show fairly good accuracies with fewer numbers of subjects
may not represent a robust solution for larger populations, as
there is increased risk of hacking the system. Yeom et al. [20]
proposed performing subject-speciﬁc stimulation to overcome
such problems.
D. Computational cost
Generally, computational cost depends on several factors,
including feature-extraction algorithms, machine learning or
pattern recognition algorithms, task complexity, and number
of channels. Combination of several extracted features can
increase accuracy even if the classiﬁcation takes a long time
to process. Methods can be selected according to requirements
of the system.
E. Stability of EEG patterns over time
Some EEG signal patterns for speciﬁc stimuli can change
over time. In particular, accuracy of systems trained by
preference-based tasks [11] can degrade as user tastes change.
Some studies [22] collected data over a long period of time
to conﬁrm persistence. In practical situations, training such a
system is laborious, since training data must be collected for
a considerable time period to ensure the permanency.
F. Changeability of EEG-based biometrics
Conventional biometrics cannot be changed because they
are ﬁxed attributes of humans, but username-password system
credentials can be changed. However, EEG-based biometrics
can be used either way. Suggested tasks of most studies assume
changeable brain activities. Even though an EEG signal pattern
differs from person to person, the task can be changed to
ensure protection of an asset [11]. The proposed system of
Yeom et al. [20] mentioned above cannot be changed because
it uses subject-speciﬁc stimulation.

978-1-5386-2965-9/17/$31.00 © 2017 IEEE
327

2017 IEEE 8th International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST 2017)

No. of Subjects

Task

Derived or Extracted Features

Classiﬁer

Ruiz-Blondet et al. [11]

3

50

visual stimulation of 400
images

Event-Related Petentials (ERP)

normalized
correlation

cross-

100%

La Rocca et al. [14]

64

108

relaxation with opened
eyes and closed eyes

Power Spectral Density (PSD), Spectral
Coherence (COH)

Mahalanobis
distancebased
classiﬁer
and
match-score fusion

100%

Chen et al. [12]

16

29

Rapid Serial Visual Representation (RSVP)

point-biserial correlation coefﬁcients,
Fisher’s transformation

Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)

100%

Palaniappan [16]

6

6

5 tasks: relaxation, math
activity, geometric ﬁgure
rotation, mental letter
composition,
visual
countings

Auto-regressive coefﬁcients (AR),
Spectral Power (SP), Inter-Hemispheric
Power Difference (IHPD), InterHemispheric
Linear
Complexity
(IHLC)

LDA

100%

Ashby et al. [17]

14

5

4 tasks: relaxation, limb
movement, visual counting, geometric ﬁgure rotation

AR, SP, IHPD, IHLC, PSD

Support Vector Machine
(SVM)

100%

Chuang et al. [15]

1

15

7
tasks:
breathing,
simulated
ﬁnger
movement, sport activity,
singing/passage recitation,
audio
listing,
color
identiﬁcation, and passthought

Cosine similarity of the vector representation

k-Nearest Neighbour (kNN)

99%

Palaniappan et al. [21]

61

20

drawings of common objects as visual stimulation

multiple signal classiﬁcation (MUSIC)

k-NN, Elman Neural Network (ENN)

98%

Riera et al. [18]

4

-

relaxation

AR, Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), mutual information, coherence, cross correlation (EEG and ECG data)

Fisher Discriminant Analysis (FDA)

98%

Jayarathne et al. [19]

14

12

imagining four digit number as cognitive task

Common Spatial Patterns (CSP)

LDA

97%

Riera et al. [22]

2

51

relaxation
eyes

closed

Higuchi fractal dimension, entropy,
skewness, standard deviation, AR

LDA

97%

Liew et al. [23]

8

10

apprehension of images as
visual stimulation

coherence, cross-correlation, mean amplitude

Fuzzy-Rough
Nearest
Neighbour (FRNN)

92%

Yeom et al. [20]

18

10

apprehension of images of
faces including self-face
as visual stimulation

difference of average signals, positive/negative peaks at speciﬁc latencies

non-linear SVM classiﬁer

86.1%

Poulos et al. [24]

2

4

relaxation
eyes

spectral features

Learning Vector Quantization (LVQ)

80%–
100%

with

with

closed

VII. C ONCLUSION
EEG signals contain discriminative information which is
stable across time, and research surveyed here shows high
accuracy for various approaches. Better discriminative features, including characteristics considered by all the systems
detailed in §V and most of those in Table III, are mostly
found in the time-domain as opposed to frequency-domain
analysis. Even simple pattern recognition algorithms can be
used to distinguish among users. Deep learning techniques
need too much data to be deployed for such applications of
EEG characterization and discrimination. EEG-based authenti-

Avg. accuracy

Author(s)

Channels

TABLE III
S UMMARY OF VARIOUS STUDIES ( IN DECREASING ORDER OF ACCURACY )

cation systems should be designed by tuning above-discussed
parameters according to desired security and usability levels.
Even though some studies conﬁrmed that signiﬁcant changes
don’t happen for some period of time even as personal taste
evolves, long-term behaviors of EEG signal patterns have yet
to be characterized.
Especially considering increased population of twins or
triplets with IVF (in vitro fertilization), it would be interesting
to do such experiments on identical (monozygotic) twins.
Since such siblings might be expected to have similar thought
processes, confusable responses to non-speciﬁc tasks such as
relaxation coved disrupt authentication.

978-1-5386-2965-9/17/$31.00 © 2017 IEEE
328

2017 IEEE 8th International Conference on Awareness Science and Technology (iCAST 2017)
R EFERENCES
[1] J. Harper, Identity Crisis: How identiﬁcation is overused and misunderstood. Cato Institute, 2006.
[2] M. E. Whitman and H. J. Mattord, Principles of Information Security.
Cengage Learning, 2011.
[3] G. Doe, “Difference Between Identiﬁcation & Authentication,”
http://itstillworks.com/difference-between-identiﬁcation-authentication3471.html, [Online; accessed 26-June-2017].
[4] F. F. Jobsis, “Noninvasive, infrared monitoring of cerebral and myocardial oxygen sufﬁciency and circulatory parameters,” Science, vol. 198,
no. 4323, pp. 1264–1267, 1977.
[5] IMOTIONS, EEG Pocket Guide. IMOTIONS, 2016.
[6] B. Farnsworth, “Top 14 EEG Hardware Companies [Ranked],”
https://imotions.com/blog/top-14-eeg-hardware-companies-ranked/,
[Online; accessed 28-June-2017].
[7] H. H. Jasper, “The ten twenty electrode system of the international federation,” Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 10,
pp. 371–375, 1958.
[8] G.-E. Chatrian, E. Lettich, and P. L. Nelson, “Modiﬁed Nomenclature for
the” 10%” Electrode System1.” J. of Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 183–186, 1988.
[9] R. Oostenveld and P. Praamstra, “The ﬁve percent electrode system for
high-resolution EEG and ERP measurements,” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 112, no. 4, pp. 713–719, 2001.
[10] S. Sanei and J. A. Chambers, EEG Signal Processing. John Wiley &
Sons, 2013.
[11] M. V. Ruiz-Blondet, Z. Jin, and S. Laszlo, “CEREBRE: A novel method
for very high accuracy event-related potential biometric identiﬁcation,”
IEEE Trans. on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 7, pp.
1618–1629, 2016.
[12] Y. Chen, A. D. Atnafu, I. Schlattner, W. T. Weldtsadik, M.-C. Roh, H. J.
Kim, S.-W. Lee, B. Blankertz, and S. Fazli, “A high-security EEG-based
login system with RSVP stimuli and dry electrodes,” IEEE Trans. on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2635–2647,
2016.
[13] A. Almehmadi and K. El-Khatib, “The state of the art in electroencephalogram and access control,” ICCIT: Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. on
Communications and Information Technology, 2013, pp. 49–54.

[14] D. La Rocca, P. Campisi, B. Vegso, P. Cserti, G. Kozmann, F. Babiloni,
and F. D. V. Fallani, “Human brain distinctiveness based on EEG spectral coherence connectivity,” IEEE Trans. on Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 2406–2412, 2014.
[15] J. Chuang, H. Nguyen, C. Wang, and B. Johnson, “I think, therefore I
am: Usability and security of authentication using brainwaves,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. on Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer,
2013, pp. 1–16.
[16] R. Palaniappan, “Electroencephalogram signals from imagined activities:
A novel biometric identiﬁer for a small population,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
on Intelligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning. Springer,
2006, pp. 604–611.
[17] C. Ashby, A. Bhatia, F. Tenore, and J. Vogelstein, “Low-Cost Electroencephalogram (EEG)-Based Authentication,” in NER: Proc. 5th Int.
IEEE/EMBS Conf. on Neural Engineering, 2011, pp. 442–445.
[18] A. Riera, S. Dunne, I. Cester, and G. Rufﬁni, “STARFAST: A wireless
wearable EEG/ECG biometric system based on the ENOBIO sensor,” in
Proc. Int. Workshop on Wearable Micro and Nanosystems for Personalised Health, 2008.
[19] I. Jayarathne, M. Cohen, and S. Amarakeerthi, “BrainID: Development
of an EEG-based biometric authentication system,” in IEMCON: Proc.
Information Technology, Electronics and Mobile Communication Conf.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[20] S.-K. Yeom, H.-I. Suk, and S.-W. Lee, “Person authentication from
neural activity of face-speciﬁc visual self-representation,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1159–1169, 2013.
[21] R. Palaniappan and D. P. Mandic, “Biometrics from brain electrical
activity: A machine learning approach,” IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 738–742, 2007.
[22] A. Riera, A. Soria-Frisch, M. Caparrini, C. Grau, and G. Rufﬁni, “Unobtrusive biometric system based on electroencephalogram analysis,”
EURASIP J. on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2008, p. 18, 2008.
[23] S.-H. Liew, Y.-H. Choo, Y. F. Low, and Z. I. M. Yusoh, “Identifying
Visual Evoked Potential (VEP) Electrodes Setting for Person Authentication,” Int. J. Adv. Soft Comput. Appl., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 85–99, 2015.
[24] M. Poulos, M. Rangoussi, and N. Alexandris, “Neural network based
person identiﬁcation using EEG features,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, vol. 2. IEEE, 1999, pp. 1117–1120.

978-1-5386-2965-9/17/$31.00 © 2017 IEEE
329

View publication stats

