Measuring the Effect of Think Aloud Protocols on Workload
using fNIRS
Matthew Pike* , Horia Maior*† , Martin Porcheron† , Sarah Sharples‡ and Max L. Wilson*
*
†
Mixed Reality Lab
Horizon Doctoral Training Centre ‡ Human Factors Research Group
University of Nottingham
University of Nottingham
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, UK
Nottingham, UK
Nottingham, UK
{psxmp8, psxhama, psxmp9, sarah.sharples, max.wilson}@nottingham.ac.uk
ABSTRACT

The Think Aloud Protocol (TAP) is a verbalisation technique widely employed in HCI user studies to give insight
into user experience, yet little work has explored the
impact that TAPs have on participants during user studies. This paper utilises a brain sensing technique, fNIRS,
to observe the e↵ect that TAPs have on participants.
Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) is a brain
sensing technology that o↵ers the potential to provide
continuous, detailed insight into brain activity, enabling
an objective view of cognitive processes during complex
tasks. Participants were asked to perform a mathematical task under 4 conditions: nonsense verbalisations,
passive concurrent think aloud protocol, invasive concurrent think aloud protocol, and a baseline of silence.
Subjective ratings and performance measures were collected during the study. Our results provide a novel view
into the e↵ect that di↵erent forms of verbalisation have
on workload during tasks. Further, the results provide a
means for estimating the e↵ect of spoken artefacts when
measuring workload, which is another step towards our
goal of proactively involving fNIRS analysis in ecologically
valid user studies.
ACM Classification Keywords

H5.2 [Information interfaces and presentation]: User Interfaces. - Evaluation/methodology.
Author Keywords

functional near-infrared spectroscopy, fNIRS, BCI,
human cognition, Think Aloud Protocol, HCI
INTRODUCTION

The Think-Aloud Protocol (TAP) is a widely used research method [23], utilised in a variety of research fields
including Human Computer Interaction. Since TAP will
use resources from verbal working memory, it is fair to
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work
for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted.
To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2014 , April 26–May 1, 2014, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-2473-1/14/04..$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2556974

CHI2014 Preprint

assume that the inclusion of spoken protocols will potentially a↵ect cognitive processes due to use of available
resources. Consequently, TAPs may a↵ect performance
in tasks, and also measures of workload during studies.
To analyse the potential impact that a TAP may have
on an individual, we use a direct measure through the
brain monitoring technology Functional Near-InfraRed
Spectroscopy (fNIRS). fNIRS has received recent focus
in HCI research for its amenability for more ecologically valid study conditions [17, 33]. While some brain
sensing techniques like functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging (fMRI) require minimal or no movement from
users, fNIRS can be used while seated naturally at a
computer [33]. Further, because fNIRS measures blood
oxygenation and deoxygenation rather than electrical signals like Electroencephalography (EEG), fNIRS permits
more natural movements associated with using a computer without being subject to significant artefacts in the
data. Although the suggestion is that fNIRS can be used
more easily within natural, ecologically valid user study
conditions, current research is still limited to performing
controlled simple Working Memory tasks (e.g. [33, 30]).
In the context of HCI, TAP is typically used as an evaluation method to elicit insights into participants thoughts
and strategies during usability and user studies. TAP,
however, has also been used in other settings, such as cognitive psychology and social sciences [7], to understand
phenomena such as user mental models, expertise, and
problem solving. As well as being a core part of user studies, verbalisations are also closely related with Working
Memory, as both the interpretation of words in the task
and the integration of thoughts involve the phonological
loop [38]. Consequently, to integrate fNIRS measurement
within a typical user study that might involve a TAP, we
have to be aware of how one will a↵ect the other. There
are various forms of TAP, including retrospective, which
occurs after a task has been completed, and concurrent,
which occurs during a task. Of concurrent forms of TAPs,
there is both invasive, which involves directly questioning
participants, and passive, which simply encourages participants to maintain verbalisations about their thoughts
and actions. Because fNIRS measurements are taken
during tasks, this paper focuses on concurrent TAPs.
In the following sections, we first review related work on
TAPs, Working Memory and mental workload, fNIRS

sensing and other technologies. The paper continues by
describing a user study examining the impact of a) nonsense verbalisations, b) passive concurrent think aloud,
and c) invasive concurrent think aloud, compared to a
baseline of silent non-verbal working memory. We then
present the results of the study, discuss the findings in
terms of what we can learn about the impact of TAP on
mental workload in general, and recommendations for
using fNIRS measurements in an HCI user study.
RELATED WORK

storage and manipulation of information” [2]. WM [5, 3,
4] processes information in two forms: verbal and spatial,
and has four main components (Figure 1): a visuo-spatial
sketch pad holding information in an analogue spatial
form (e.g. colours, shapes, maps, etc.), a phonological
loop holding verbal information in an acoustical form
(e.g. numbers, words, etc.), an episodic bu↵er dedicated
to linking verbal and spatial information in chronological
order and finally, a central executive acting as supervisory
system and controlling the information from and to its
“slave systems”.

This section presents three key areas of related work: 1)
TAP and their e↵ect on Cognition, 2) Working Memory
(WM) models and the Prefrontal Cortex (PFC), and 3)
Brain sensing techniques in HCI including fNIRS.
Think-Aloud Protocols

Ericsson and Simon’s seminal work on verbal reporting
of participants thought process is the most cited amongst
Think Aloud Protocols [29]. Prior to this work, little
consideration was made to the type of verbalisation produced by participants under study conditions [16]. In
their original discussion of TAP, Ericsson and Simon [11]
distinguish between 3 distinct levels at which verbalisations occur. Levels 1 and 2 are described as being valid
representations of a participant’s mental state, since they
are verbalising information stored in short term memory and are representative of the participant’s current
state. Level 3 requires access to long term memory and
influences what would otherwise be their typical state.
Ericsson and Simon’s version (Levels 1 and 2) of the
protocol is strictly non-intrusive, and researchers implementing the protocol are restricted to simply using the
verbal prompt -“Keep talking”- to avoid influencing the
participant, and ensuring that the reported data relates
solely to the task. To distinguish between other forms,
we refer to this type of TAP as Passive (PTAP) for the
remainder of this paper.
In practice, however, it has been shown that many researchers incorrectly implement or misreport the TAP
they are using [23]. Many practitioners of TAP prefer
to question participants at level 3 to obtain coherent,
actionable utterances relating to the system under evaluation, rather than inferring results from level 1 and 2
utterances. Researchers have attempted to formalise this
level of questioning [9, 16]. We characterise these approaches under the umbrella term Invasive TAP (ITAP).
With ITAP, researchers are free to probe the user’s mental model, but Ericsson and Simon would disregard the
findings at these levels stating that they have been influenced. Under ITAP, a practitioner is able to prompt the
participant with more probing questions - “Why did you
do X?”.
Working Memory

In an attempt to characterise and model the cognitive
processes involved when a participant is partaking in a
TAP, we draw on research into Working Memory (WM)[5],
a specific system in the brain which “provides temporary

Figure 1. Baddeley’s Working Memory Model

Additionally, Baddeley describes the concept of Longterm memory (LTM), which represents a di↵erent storage
location to working memory. LTM is unlimited in space
and is responsible for storing information that is no longer
in working memory.
We can relate a number of concepts described by Ericsson
and Simon to the working memory model described by
Baddeley. For example, Ericsson and Simon note that
verbalisations at level 1 and 2 occur within short term
memory. We can further characterise this with Ericsson
and Simon stating that TAP will utilise the Phonological
loop as it is verbal in nature. Tasks under which the TAP
is performed may also interact with other components of
the working memory model. Tasks involving imagery or
mental rotation, for example, will utilise the visuo-spatial
sketchpad since they are spatial, whereas verbalising occurs in the phonological loop. For such tasks under TAP
conditions the two concepts of the model will be activated, with the central executive mediating information
flow between the two. The episodic bu↵er may also have
a role under ITAP conditions, since the protocol will
require access to memories that are not in the immediate
short term memory. We would not expect the Episodic
bu↵er to be utilised in the PTAP condition.
In addition to the WM model, we can also consider the
Information Processing Model [39] and Multiple Resource
Model [38] proposed by Wickens. Wickens describes that
necessary resources are limited and aims to illustrate how
elements of the human information processing system
such as attention, perception, memory, decision making
and response selection interconnect. We are interested
in observing how and when these elements interconnect
under TAPs. Wickens describes three di↵erent ‘stages’
(see STAGES dimension in Figure 2) at which information is transformed: a perception stage, a processing or
cognition stage, and a response stage. The first stage
involves perceiving information that is gathered by our
senses and provide meaning and interpretation of what
is being sensed. The second stage represents the step

where we manipulate and “think about” the perceived
information. This part of the information processing
system takes place in WM and consists of a wide variety
of mental activities. We can observe that TAP will likely
a↵ect each of these elements since the protocol introduces additional sensory inputs, which require potential
comprehension and will sometimes require a response
(specifically under ITAP).
Wickens also proposes the Multiple Resource Model [38],
illustrated in Figure 2. The elements of this model overlap
with the needs and considerations of evaluating complex
tasks which could be analysed and a↵ected by the inclusion of a TAP. He describes the aspects of cognition and
the multiple resource theory in four dimensions: STAGES,
MODALITIES, CODES and the VISUAL PROCESSING
(see Figure 2).

Brain Sensing Techniques

There are several brain sensing technologies available for
research, including (but not limited to) fMRI, EEG, and
fNIRS, which are summarised in Table 1. Each of these
technologies have di↵erent strengths and weaknesses, as
discussed by Tan and Nijholt [34, Chapter 1].
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is a functional neuroimaging technique that associates detected
changes in blood flow (hemodynamic response) to brain
activity. fMRI is typically used for applications requiring
high spatial resolution, but requires people to lay very
still, and precludes the use of a computer. Participants
are unable to interact directly with a system, but can
respond to visual stimuli through the use of mirrors. Li
et. al [22] for example, used real time fMRI to control
the animation speed of a virtual human runner.
Electroencephalography (EEG) typically uses between 16
and 64 sensors on the scalp to detect varying electrical charge within the brain. With the introduction of
commercially available bluetooth EEG sensors, like the
Emotiv1 , EEG has become an a↵ordable option for brain
sensing [10]. For evaluation, however, EEG data is susceptible to motion artefacts, and so producing averages
for periods of interaction provides limited insight. Pike
et al [31] proposed, that EEG data was most valuable
when combined visually with recorded TAP data, as statements of confusion, or pauses in verbalising ones actions,
coincided with and were qualified by EEG data.

Figure 2. The 4-D multiple resource model, by Wickens

One of the key roles of the Multiple Resource Model is to
demonstrate the hypothesised independence of modalities
and use this to design tasks. We know for example that
the inclusion of TAP will introduce additional Auditory
resource requirements, since the participant will hear their
own verbalisations. This in turn will require additional
Perception from the participant and will draw on their
Verbal coding resources and Vocal Verbal responses.
The Prefrontal Cortex (PFC) is the anterior part of the
frontal lobes of the brain and is considered central to the
function of WM, dealing with executive and attention
processes [19]. Miller and Cohen defines the representations in the PFC as “attentional templates, retrieval
cues, rules, or goals” [27], and many researchers agree
that PFC function is one of Baddley’s executive control
[1]. Conversely, Rushworth reports that not all PFC
subregions are essential for working memory [32]. The
PFC is the region of the brain that we targeted during
this study since there is significant evidence to support
its role in WM [6, 8]. In addition to the PFC, Brocas
area is located within the frontal lobe and is linked with
speech production [12].

fNIRS uses blood oxygenation, rather than electrical
levels, for determining the activation of areas in the
brain, where more blood flow indicates higher activity.
Recent research has shown that because blood-flow in the
brain is less a↵ected by body movement, fNIRS may be a
more appropriate brain sensing technology for evaluation
[17, 30, 21]. Because it takes several seconds for blood to
flow to the brain [37], fNIRs has been largely discounted
for real-time interaction with systems.
EXPERIMENT DESIGN

The aim of this study was to investigate how verbalisation
and TAPs a↵ect cognition and the thought process during
user study tasks. We produced three research questions:
• How can we identify the impact of TAPs on human
cognition and mental workload using fNIRS?
• What are the most suitable measures to sense such
an impact?
• How can we sense the reduction of available resources
due to integrating a TAP concurrently with a task?
To answer these research questions, a theoretical understanding of TAPs, human cognition, mental workload and
the interconnection between these concepts is required.
Wickens’ Multiple Resource Model [38] can describe the
relationship between the available resources and task demands. When performing a task, a person perceives both
their own verbalisation and/or external stimuli as an
1

http://www.emotiv.com/

Technique
fMRI
EEG
fNIRS

Physical
Property
Magnetic
Electrical
Optical

Sensitivity
to Motion
Very High
High
Low

Portability
None
Portable
Portable

Spatial
Resolution
High
Low
High

Temporal
Resolution
Low
High
Low

Cost
Expensive
Reasonable
Moderate

Table 1. Summary of Brain Sensing technologies

Auditory modality. During ‘think aloud’ we also process
information (make decisions, store memories, retrieve
memories, etc.), and output them as a response (e.g. as
a Vocal Verbal encoding). Therefore, TAPs might have
an impact on all three stages (perception, cognition and
response) of the Multiple Resource Model. According to
the model, a TAP is a verbal/linguistic activity, therefore
the codes of its cognition stage is Verbal. Consequently,
we chose a task (described further below) that was easy to
verbalise and involves continuous use of the phonological
loop, such that di↵erent verbalisation conditions would
interact with the task.
Primarily, we wanted to compare the di↵erent concurrent
TAPs against a baseline of not verbalising. In order
to check whether simply using your voice creates an
artefact in the fNIRS data, as opposed to thinking and
talking, we also included a second baseline of repeatedly
verbalising the word ‘blah’. Type of verbalisation, as
primary independent variable, created four conditions:
1. Task Only (Baseline - B1)
2. Task + “Blah blah blah” (Baseline - B2)
3. Task + Passive Concurrent TAP (PTAP)
4. Task + Invasive Concurrent TAP (ITAP)
We designed a repeated measures, within-participants
study to compare these conditions, where participants
solved eight mathematical problems. Conditions and
tasks were counterbalanced using a Latin-square design.
Hypotheses

We had a number of hypothesis that we sought to investigate whilst conducting this study relative to performance,
cognition, and participants’ grouping based on mathematical performance (High and Low performing groups):
HP - There will be a significant di↵erence in performance between verbal conditions.
HC - There will be a significant di↵erence in cognition
between verbal conditions.
HP and HC were drawn from Wickens 4D Multiple Resources Model [38]. Both TAP and mathematical tasks
should primarily use verbal working memory in the modality, encoding, and processings dimensions. Consequently,
the demands imposed by various verbal conditions may
a↵ect the total workload element, and workload may then
a↵ect performance.
HC.S - There will be a significant di↵erence in cognition between verbal conditions for high performing
participants.

Figure 3. A screenshot of the task

HC.W - There will be a significant di↵erence in cognition between verbal conditions for low performing
participants.
Depending on how well participants performed during
the four conditions, we distinguished between high performing participants (top half) and low performing participants (bottom half) [26]. These groups were formed
to investigate whether TAPs have a di↵erent impact on
cognition relative to the participants grouping.
Task

In order to determine how TAPs a↵ect the di↵erent stages
of the Multiple Resources Model, the task had to be chosen carefully such that verbalisation could potentially
interrupt the process. The first criterion, therefore, was
that the task should primarily use the phonological loop,
and thus be a verbally oriented task. Second, the task
had to involve continuous use of the phonological loop,
and so a simple and discrete memory task was not sufficient. Third, the task had to be verbalisable for the
TAPs, which also meant that a memory task was not
sufficient. Fourth, the task also had to have various levels of difficulty to enable control over the primary task
mental demands; according to the resource vs demands
model [25] harder tasks would increase demand and thus
reducing participant’s resources for engaging in the TAP.
Finally, performance on the task had to be measurable
in order to determine the e↵ect of verbalisations. Based
upon these five criteria, we decided on using a mathematics task. Participants were provided with a set of
six numbers and had to get as close as possible to a
target final number. This problem is a variation on what
is commonly known as the countdown problem2 . Each
number may be used only once (although there is no
requirement to use every number), and participants have
2
based on the mathematical challenge presented to contestants
of the popular UK TV quiz show “Countdown”

60s to reach as close to the target number as possible, using four operators: addition, subtraction, multiplication
and division.

were prompted to recall their solution. The solutions
provided by participants were recorded by the researcher
on paper and later digitalised.

36 versions of the task were created to be used across the
four conditions, at various levels of difficulty. To classify
their difficulty, one researcher and two independent judges
rated the difficulty of each problem. Difficulty was judged
in four categories: easy, quite easy, quite hard, and hard.
Inter-rater agreeability was confirmed with a Cohen’s
Kappa test, where the researcher achieved scores of 0.6419
(substantial agreement [20]) with the first independent
judge, and 0.8571 (almost perfect agreement) with the
second. This agreement was used to ensure that problem
difficulty was balanced between conditions.

After each condition, participants completed a standard
NASA TLX form to subjectively rate their mental workload during the task. Each condition concluded with
a thirty second rest period where the participants were
asked to remain still, relax and empty their mind of
thoughts.

Participants

Twenty participants (14 male, 6 female) with an average
age of 28.55 years were recruited to take part in the
study. Participants were recruited from the University of
Nottingham, and included a mix of sta↵ members and
students from a range of disciplines. All participants had
normal or corrected vision and reported no history of
head trauma or brain damage. The study was approved
by the school’s ethics committee. Participants provided
informed consent, and were compensated with £15 in gift
vouchers.
Procedure

Participants were first introduced to the task that they
would be completing during the study. They were given
two practice runs of the task (under baseline conditions)
to familiarise themselves and reduce the impact of learning in their first condition. Once comfortable with the
requirements of the task, participants were fitted with the
fNIRS brain imaging device, which was placed upon their
forehead targeting the PFC. At this point participants
entered the recorded section of the study. During this
stage, participant input was captured, verbalisations were
recorded via microphone, and brain data was captured
on a separate, calibrated machine.
Participants partook in four conditions which were counterbalanced using a latin square rotation. Each condition
began with a tutorial and practice session. The tutorial
session was used to train the participant on how to verbalise according to the specific TAP being used in the
particular condition. The practice session would then
serve as an opportunity to trial the technique prior to
beginning the test itself and thus reducing the interference on the first task in each condition. Each condition
included eight of the tasks described above.
For each of the eight tasks in each condition, participants
were given sixty seconds to attempt the problem. All
calculations were performed mentally; pen and paper
was not provided. After the sixty seconds had elapsed
(or if the participant decided to proceed prior to this),
participants were prompted to enter the number they
had achieved during the calculation period. To avoid
participants simply entering the target number, they

The study was conducted in an office-like environment.
This was an important consideration as many brain based
studies are conducted under strictly controlled lab settings. The office environment provides a more naturalistic
and ecologically valid setting.
Measurements and Equipment

We collected various types of data during the study. The
data can be categorised into two groups: Performance
during the study (P), and Cognition (C).
Task Accuracy - P

We measured task performance according to distance
from the target answer for each of the 36 problems across
the four conditions. Because the target varied, we used
measured distance from the target as a percentage, which
was subtracted from 100%. 100% represented the correct
answer, 95% as being 5% from the target, and so on.
As the results tended towards the target, task accuracy
was analysed. To provide incentive to submit actual
rather than ideal answers, we also measured whether
participants could recall the solution to their answer.
Task Time - P

Task time was measured for each of the 36 problems
performed across the four conditions. We note that participants were not encouraged to solve the problem in
the shortest possible time, rather, they were asked to get
as close possible to the target.
NASA-TLX questionnaire - C

We used the NASA-TLX questionnaire, a subjective workload assessment tool [15], based on the weighted average ratings of six subscales including, in order: Mental
Demand, Physical Demand, Temporal Demand, Performance, E↵ort and Frustration. Each participant was
asked to self rate their mental workload using the NASATLX once after each condition. We additionally investigated each of subscales independently.
fNIRS data - C

fNIRS data was recorded using an fNIRS300 device
and the associated COBI Studio recording software provided by Biopac Systems inc. The headband shaped
device is a sixteen-channel transducer for continuous
Near Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS). The headband consists of four infrared (IR) emitters operating on a range
between 700 to 900 nm, and ten IR detectors. The
device is placed on the PFC targeting the Brodmann
area 10 (BA10). Oxygenated hemoglobin (HbO) and
deoxygenated-hemoglobin (Hb) are both strong absorbers

of light, whereas skin, tissue and bone are mostly transparent to NIR light, this property is typically referred
to as the optical window [18]. The tissue is radiated by
the light sources and the detectors receive the light after
the interaction with the tissue. See Figure 4 [13] for an
illustration of how the headband is positioned, and to
visualise the path that the light follows during operation.
Preprocessing was performed to transform raw data from
the device into oxygenation values using the Modified
Beer-Lambert law (MBLL) [36]. We also applied filtering
algorithms to remove high-frequency noise, physiological
artefacts such as heartbeats and motion derived artefacts.
To perform this preprocessing step we used the Matlab
Toolbox, NIRS-SPM [40]. We performed de-trending
using a discrete cosine transform with a high frequency
cut o↵ of 128 seconds. The baseline was removed, and
low pass filtering was performed with a Gaussian filter
with a width of 1 second. We also considered the delay
induced by the hemodynamic response [36] by omitting
the first 10s of the trial when processing the data [30].
The Biopac fNIRS device used in this study provides 16
channels of brain data readings. A channel is defined
by the relationship between a source and detector pair
as shown in Figure 4. From the MBLL we receive Hb,
HbO and TotalHb (Hb + HbO) values for each channel.
Measures were synthesised by combining specific channels averages to form a single measurement. Channels
3,4,5,6 were used to represent the left side and channels
11,12,13,14 formed the right side in these measurements.
An overall measurement was produced by averaging the
data from all 16 channels(see Figure 4).

RESULTS

We began by checking for ordering e↵ect. A one way
repeated measure ANOVA showed that participants performed significantly slower in the first condition they
experienced, while average time to complete the subsequent conditions was even (F (19, 3) = 2.816, p < 0.05).
An LSD post-hoc ANOVA test also showed that average
scores also improved between the first condition they
experienced and the last (F (19, 3) = 2.271, p < 0.05).
Performance

Against hypothesis HP, our analysis showed no significant
di↵erence in task accuracy between conditions. We found
no significant di↵erence in performance between any of
the four conditions, however, under the TAP conditions,
participant performance slightly improved. There was
also no di↵erence in the number of tasks correctly calculated in each condition. We hypothesised that, ITAP
under time pressure would cause performance to drop, but
instead these results support the findings of McDonald
et al. [24] who found that neither form of TAP a↵ected
performance.

Figure 5. Mean time to solve a set of tasks

Figure 4. Sensor layout for the Biopac fNIRS used

Experiment Software

When designing the study we placed a strong emphasis on
automating the running of the study and collection of the
associated data. With the exception of the brain data, all
other measures were collected from a single program. We
developed this program using PEBL: The Psychology Experiment Building Language [28]. The language provides
a convenient set of features including accurate experiment
timing and predefined psychology/study procedures such
as demographic questionnaires. Of particular relevance
to this study was the pre-defined, computerised version
of NASA-TLX.

A significant di↵erence was found in terms of time to
complete tasks (Figure 5). As perhaps expected, participants took significantly longer to solve tasks in the
ITAP condition (F (17, 3) = 9.895, p < 0.01) relative to
the other three conditions (B1: p < 0.005, B2: p < 0.001,
PTAP: p < 0.05). PTAP was not significantly di↵erent
to B1 or B2. This time di↵erence was likely created by
the additional time required to explain decisions being
made. Participants were not asked to solve the tasks in
the shortest amount of time, but were encouraged to get
as close to the target answer as possible. As such this
metric is a measure of the participants natural behaviour
under a given condition.
Mental Workload: Subjective measure

In support of hypothesis HC, we found significant differences between conditions in the NASA-TLX scales:
Mental E↵ort, Mental Demands, and Physical Demands.

Figure 6. Means for three sub-scales of NASA-TLX

Against our own intuitions, each of these measures demonstrated higher demands for B2 compared to the other
conditions (see Figure 6). A Wilcoxon signed-rank test
showed that B2 created significantly more mental e↵ort
than B1 (Z = 2.058, p < 0.05), and it required more
mental demands (Z = 2.292, p < 0.05). The di↵erence
between B2 and PTAP was only p = 0.075 and there
was no significant di↵erence between ITAP and the other
conditions. Participants also rated B2 as being physically
more demanding than the other conditions (B1: p < 0.05,
PTAP p = 0.067, and ITAP p < 0.05). This is to say that
participants found the additional utterance of a nonsense
word whilst solving the maths problems induced a greater
physical demand than other conditions (see Figure 6).
Correlations between performance scales from unweighted
NASA-TLX and performance data were found. This
includes a negative Pearson correlation between NASATLX Performance scale and distance from target r =
252, n = 80, p = 0.024, indicating that participants
were rating their performance as worse, when in fact it
was better. Two positive Pearson correlations between
NASA-TLX Mental Demands and Temporal Demands
when compared with time to solve a problem were also
found: r = 0.340, n = 80, p = 0.002, and r = 0.408, n =
80, p = 0.001 respectively.

Figure 7. Overall HbO and Hb levels for each condition

unable to confirm these finding across all participants,
however we found a positive correlation between performance data (distance from target) and fNIRS overall Hb,
r = 0.228, n = 80, p = 0.04. This possibly complements
Peck’s correlation assuming that when mental demands
are high to the point of overload, performance decreases
and therefore Hb follows. This assumption ties well with
the Limited Resource Model presented by Megaw [25].
There was also a strong positive Pearson correlation (r =
0.474, n = 80, p < 0.001) between the fNIRS readings Hb
left and Hb right.
Mathematics Skill

Peck et al [30] found di↵erences in participants depending
on their ability to analyse both pie and bar charts. Similarly, we believed that mathematical propensity would
a↵ect an individuals performance under di↵ering TAPs,
with the assumption that high performers would better cope with TAPs, while lower performers would be
impaired as a result of reduced resources (from TAP).

Mental Workload: fNIRS

High Performers

Further supporting HC, our analysis found a significant
di↵erence in brain region activation in both right and left
inferior PFC during the experiment conditions.

The high performing group rated ITAP as being more
mentally demanding (Wilcoxon signed-rank test with
Z = 1.89, p = 0.059) and requiring more mental e↵ort
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Z = 1.98, p = 0.048)
when compared against PTAP. A Spearman negative
correlation for the strong mathematicians between the
NASA-TLX Mental Demands scale and the fNIRS Hb levels on the right side of the PFC (r = 0.348, n = 40, p =
0.028) confirms Peck’s [30] findings. High performers also
demonstrated a positive Spearman correlation between
distance from target and fNIRS Hb on the left side of
the PFC (r = 0.344, n = 40, p = 0.03). Weighted NASA
TLX score also positively correlated with time taken to
solve a problem (r = 0.399, n = 40, p = 0.01).

As shown in Figure 7, OverallHbO were significantly
higher during B2 compared to all other conditions (PTAP:
p < 0.05, ITAP: p = 0.064). We also noted an e↵ect on
the rest time at the end of each conditions: values at
rest after B2 were significantly higher than values at rest
after B1 (p = 0.05).
Peck et al [30] found a negative correlation between fNIRS
levels of Hb and the subjective ratings from NASA-TLX
Mental Demands scale. Tasks that created more mental
e↵ort were accompanied by lower levels of Hb. We were

Low Performers

For the low performing group we observed an agreement
between weighted NASA-TLX score and fNIRS overall
Hb. There was the same significant di↵erence from a
Wilcoxon Sign Rank test in both NASA-TLX and fNIRS
(Z = 1.78, p = 0.074) between PTAP and ITAP. Participants workload measured with both NASA-TLX and
fNIRS is marginally higher in PTAP than ITAP. This
result is opposite to what was observed with the high
performing group.
DISCUSSION
fNIRS, Language and Mental Workload

Activations in the left side of the prefrontal cortex are
known to occur during semantic, relative to nonsemantic,
tasks that relate or involve “the generation of words to
semantic cues or the classification of words or pictures into
semantic categories” [14]. Due to the physical placement
of our fNIRS device on participants foreheads, we can
discount the interaction between Broca’s area and our
results as it does not fall within the reach of our device.
Because fNIRS was sensitive to the B2 condition, we
developed two premises (interpretations) of the results:
1. fNIRS is particularly picking up the part of the brain
that is activated during B2 and therefore the signal
received by fNIRS is higher, or
2. fNIRS is picking up an indicator related to mental
workload and that B2 induces more workload. The
reason behind this is the non-compatibility and noncomplementarity of B2 with the mathematical reasoning task, rather than the compatibility of verbalisation
protocols from PTAP and ITAP with the mathematical
reasoning task.
One way to distinguish between these two is to look at
the participants performance data and subjective ratings
(the NASA-TLX scores) together with fNIRS. If the first
premise is true, you would not expect a di↵erence in
mental workload (in the subjective scores) between the
verbalisation conditions. Additionally, you would not
expect any relationship between performance or NASATLX data with fNIRS readings. We found significant
di↵erence between verbalisation conditions in NASA-TLX
scores and we also found correlations between fNIRS data
with both performance and NASA-TLX. If fNIRS would
pick up information related to language generation, you
would expect significant di↵erence in fNIRS data between
verbalisation conditions and the silent condition (which
we did not find, see Figure 7). With this in mind, we
propose that fNIRS is not an indicator of how many
words you are saying, but is sensitive to mental workload
and human cognition (therefore provides support for the
second premise).
Using the fNIRS alone we were unable to identify the significant di↵erences we were expecting. However we found
the fNIRS data to be complementary to existing measures such as performance and NASA-TLX. Considering
the number of marginally significant results(p < 0.075),

we believe that increasing the number of participants
would increase power, reduce type II error, and positively
impact our findings.
High and Low Performers

If generalisable, our findings suggest that for high performers PTAP is the more suitable protocol and that
ITAP is better suited to low performers. One possible explanation for this is that high performers have an
existing procedural structure in which they operate, so interrupting this procedure (as is experienced under ITAP)
potentially interferes with their natural behaviour. For
low performers, however, such structure is not present
and verbalising via PTAP is potentially troublesome, as
they are being forced to verbalise a process that is absent
or unnatural for them. The introduction of carefully
chosen prompts, however, may encourage non-experts
to describe how they are struggling and provide useful
insight into how researchers may help these types of users
in the future.
Using fNIRS to Measure Mental Workload

In this study we looked at evaluating the cognitive impact
of various TAPs using fNIRS as a novel measurement.
fNIRS was chosen for its non invasive application, portability and relative resilience to motion artefacts. We
found the device to be suitable ecologically for HCI style
user study settings, with the device providing minimal
distraction and interference. After completing the study,
we informally questioned the participants regarding their
experience with wearing the fNIRS device. No participant described feeling particularly uncomfortable during
the study, some did however state that they began to
experience some discomfort towards the end of the study.
We advise that studies utilising fNIRS should aim to keep
sessions below 1 hour in a single sitting.
We believe that fNIRS is well suited to HCI evaluation
and usability testing. We believe that the inclusion of
this novel new measurement complements existing evaluation measures such as NASA-TLX. fNIRS benefits
from having the properties of being both an objective
and continuous measure allowing for accurate, time correlated recording during evaluation and testing studies,
especially when compared to the subjective one time
snapshot rating achieved via NASA-TLX. We must also
note the potential negatives associated with this type
of technology. fNIRS is an emerging technology and as
such does not have the associated supporting research
proving its correctness. Studies have correlated the measurements to those observed with fMRI [35], specifically
the BOLD signal. Additionally, in the current state of
technology, fNIRS can only be used to detect a level of
workload (high or low), leaving a distinct lack of mapping
between the readings recorded with fNIRS and the actual
cognitive or emotional states. For example, detecting
frustration under a evaluation study would be a useful
measure, but is not currently obtainable from fNIRS.

Another point of interest, that can possibly be considered
a shortcoming of this study is the exclusion of performing
the study task without wearing the fNIRS device. Doing
so would allow us to determine whether fNIRS a↵ected
performance or behaviour in anyway. We did ask however,
as a part of the informal post study interview, whether
participants felt that they were influenced in some way
by wearing the device; no one reported such an e↵ect.
This does leave the potential for a follow up study to
examine whether there was indeed an e↵ect.
Running a TAP

One of our research questions was to investigate two think
aloud protocols (namely PTAP and ITAP). The study
results should be seen as a positive indicator that both
TAPs do not significantly a↵ect or influence participants
ability to solve the tasks presented in the study. We used a
high demand tasks and participants performance was not
negatively a↵ected in any way. Contrarily, we observed a
slight improvement in participants’ performance under
TAP conditions, confirming with McDonald [24] that
using the TAPs during the task did not have a negative
influence on participants’ performance.
Reflecting on Wicken’s Multiple Resource Model, using
multiple resources that are complementary and compatible with the task in hand might have a positive impact
on performance in the case of non multitask resource
overload. Between the four conditions, participants performed the worse in Condition B2 where they had to
repeatedly say ‘Blah’ during task solving. This was due
to a higher workload generated by the condition, sensed
with both fNIRS and NASA TLX subjective scale.
The TAPs conditions di↵ered when compared between
the expertise level of participants. The high performing
group rated ITAP as being more mentally demanding requiring more mental e↵ort when compared against PTAP.
This result was also confirmed with the fNIRS data. Conversely for the low performing group, PTAP was the one
that was more mentally demanding.
CONCLUSIONS

The aims of this research were a) to investigate how
verbalisations might a↵ect the use of fNIRS in increasingly ecologically valid user studies, and b) to provide
insights into how di↵erent forms of verbalisations a↵ect
mental workload and performance in user studies. In
order to achieve our aims, we compared nonsense verbalisations with di↵erent forms of concurrent TAP: passive
and invasive. One of our primary findings was that noncomplementary verbalisations, as opposed to complex
verbalisations, created higher levels of mental workload.
In particular, nonsense verbalisations created higher mental workload, across measures, than Invasive TAP where
participants discussed their mathematical problem solving options. Consequently, we can conclude that the
use of TAPs in user studies is fine as long as the discussion uses words relating to solving the task. We saw
a slight increase in mental workload for Invasive TAP

compared to Passive TAP, indicating that some Invasive
TAP verbalisations may not have been directly conducive
to solving the task. None of the nonsense verbalisations
supported the task.
The findings about non-complementary language were
hidden within the subjective, reflective, self-assessments
included in NASA TLX; ratings had high variance, and
results were only evident in some of the sub-scales. Further, we saw no di↵erence in task performance between
conditions. The objective measure obtained from the
fNIRS however, provides a clear indication of the participants’ mental workload whilst completing the study
tasks. Because there were no di↵erences between the
silent baseline and TAP conditions, we can conclude a)
that fNIRS measurements were not largely a↵ected by
verbalisation itself, and b) that fNIRS can be used to
determine mental workload objectively during tasks if
verbalisations remain task-related.
Overall, we provide three main contributions: 1) we provide novel insights into the underlying cause of increased
mental workload created by TAPs during tasks; 2) we
provide a novel example of using fNIRS to measure cognition during a more complex task than prior work; and
3) we provide an example to show that fNIRS is suitable
for use with tasks that involve verbalisation. Our results
make a positive step towards proactively using fNIRS as
an evaluation tool within realistic HCI user studies.
REFERENCES

1. Aron, A. R., Robbins, T. W., and Poldrack, R. A.
Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex.
Trends in cognitive sciences 8, 4 (2004), 170–177.
2. Baddeley, A. Working memory. Science 255, 5044
(1992), 556–559.
3. Baddeley, A. The episodic bu↵er: a new component
of working memory? Trends in cognitive sciences 4,
11 (2000), 417–423.
4. Baddeley, A. D. Is working memory still working?
European psychologist 7, 2 (2002), 85–97.
5. Baddeley, A. D., and Hitch, G. Working memory.
The psychology of learning and motivation 8 (1974),
47–89.
6. Braver, T. S., Cohen, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Jonides,
J., Smith, E. E., and Noll, D. C. A parametric study
of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working
memory. Neuroimage 5, 1 (1997), 49–62.
7. Charters, E. The use of think-aloud methods in
qualitative research an introduction to think-aloud
methods. Brock Education (2013).
8. D’Esposito, M., Detre, J. A., Alsop, D. C., Shin,
R. K., Atlas, S., and Grossman, M. The neural basis
of the central executive system of working memory.
Nature 378, 6554 (1995), 279–281.
9. Dumas, J. S. A practical guide to usability testing.
Intellect Books, 1999.
10. Duvinage, M., Castermans, T., Dutoit, T., Petieau,
M., Hoellinger, T., Saedeleer, C., Seetharaman, K.,
and Cheron, G. A P300-based quantitative

11.
12.

13.
14.

15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

20.
21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

comparison between the Emotiv Epoc headset and a
medical EEG device. In IASTED (2012).
Ericsson, K. A., and Simon, H. A. Protocol analysis.
MIT press, 1985.
Fadiga, L., Craighero, L., and DAusilio, A. Broca’s
area in language, action, and music. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 1169, 1 (2009),
448–458.
fNIR Devices LLC. fNIR Imager & COBI Studio
Manual. Biopac, 2013.
Gabrieli, J. D., Poldrack, R. A., and Desmond, J. E.
The role of left prefrontal cortex in language and
memory. Proceedings of the national Academy of
Sciences 95, 3 (1998), 906–913.
Hart, S. G., and Staveland, L. E. Development of
nasa-tlx (task load index): Results of empirical and
theoretical research. Human mental workload (1988).
Hertzum, M., Hansen, K. D., and Andersen, H. H.
Scrutinising usability evaluation: does thinking
aloud a↵ect behaviour and mental workload?
Behaviour & Information Technology 28, 2 (2009),
165–181.
Hirshfield, L. M., Solovey, E. T., Girouard, A.,
Kebinger, J., Jacob, R. J., Sassaroli, A., and Fantini,
S. Brain measurement for usability testing and
adaptive interfaces: an example of uncovering
syntactic workload with functional near infrared
spectroscopy. In Proc. CHI, ACM (2009), 2185–2194.
Izzetoglu, M., Bunce, S. C., Izzetoglu, K., Onaral,
B., and Pourrezaei, K. Functional brain imaging
using near-infrared technology. IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Magazine 26, 4 (2007), 38.
Kane, M. J., and Engle, R. W. The role of prefrontal
cortex in working-memory capacity, executive
attention, and general fluid intelligence: An
individual-di↵erences perspective. Psychonomic
bulletin & review 9, 4 (2002), 637–671.
Landis, J. R., and Koch, G. G. The measurement of
observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics
(1977), 159–174.
Leanne, M., and Robert, J. Using brain
measurement to evaluate reality based interactions.
Challenges in the Evaluation of Usability and User
Experience in Reality Based Interaction 5 (2009),
19–20.
Li, X., Xu, L., Yao, L., and Zhao, X. A novel HCI
system based on real-time fmri using motor imagery
interaction. In Foundations of Augmented Cognition.
Springer, 2013, 703–708.
McDonald, S., Edwards, H. M., and Zhao, T.
Exploring think-alouds in usability testing: an
international survey. Professional Communication,
IEEE Transactions on 55, 1 (2012), 2–19.
McDonald, S., and Petrie, H. The e↵ect of global
instructions on think-aloud testing. In CHI, ACM
(2013), 2941–2944.
Megaw, T. The definition and measurement of
mental workload. Evaluation of human work, Eds.
Esmond N. Corlett, and John R. Wilson (2005),
525–551.

26. Miles, J., and Shevlin, M. Applying regression and
correlation: A guide for students and researchers.
Sage, 2001.
27. Miller, E. K., and Cohen, J. D. An integrative
theory of prefrontal cortex function. Annual review
of neuroscience 24, 1 (2001), 167–202.
28. Mueller, S. Pebl: The psychology experiment
building language (version 0.10).[computer
experiment programming language]. Retrieved Nov
(2012).
29. Olmsted-Hawala, E. L., Murphy, E. D., Hawala, S.,
and Ashenfelter, K. T. Think-aloud protocols: a
comparison of three think-aloud protocols for use in
testing data-dissemination web sites for usability. In
CHI, ACM (2010), 2381–2390.
30. Peck, E. M., Yuksel, B. F., Ottley, A., Jacob, R. J.,
and Chang, R. Using fNIRS Brain Sensing to
Evaluate Information Visualization Interfaces. In
CHI, ACM (2013).
31. Pike, M., Wilson, M. L., Divoli, A., and Medelyan,
A. CUES: Cognitive Usability Evaluation System. In
EuroHCIR2012 (2012), 51–54.
32. Rushworth, M. F., Nixon, P. D., Eacott, M. J., and
Passingham, R. E. Ventral prefrontal cortex is not
essential for working memory. The Journal of
Neuroscience 17, 12 (1997), 4829–4838.
33. Solovey, E. T., Girouard, A., Chauncey, K.,
Hirshfield, L. M., Sassaroli, A., Zheng, F., Fantini,
S., and Jacob, R. J. Using fNIRS brain sensing in
realistic HCI settings: experiments and guidelines.
In Proc. UIST2009, ACM (2009), 157–166.
34. Tan, D. S., and Nijholt, A. Brain-Computer
Interfaces: applying our minds to human-computer
interaction. Springer, 2010.
35. Toronov, V., Webb, A., Choi, J. H., Wolf, M.,
Michalos, A., Gratton, E., and Hueber, D.
Investigation of human brain hemodynamics by
simultaneous near-infrared spectroscopy and
functional magnetic resonance imaging. Medical
physics 28 (2001), 521.
36. Villringer, A., and Chance, B. Non-invasive optical
spectroscopy and imaging of human brain function.
Trends in neurosciences 20, 10 (1997), 435–442.
37. Villringer, A., Planck, J., Hock, C., Schleinkofer, L.,
and Dirnagl, U. Near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS):
a new tool to study hemodynamic changes during
activation of brain function in human adults.
Neuroscience letters 154, 1 (1993), 101–104.
38. Wickens, C. D. Multiple resources and mental
workload. The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society 50, 3 (2008), 449–455.
39. Wickens, C. D., Gordon, S. E., and Liu, Y. An
introduction to human factors engineering. Pearson
Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, 2004.
40. Ye, J. C., Tak, S., Jang, K. E., Jung, J., and Jang, J.
NIRS-SPM: statistical parametric mapping for
near-infrared spectroscopy. Neuroimage 44, 2 (2009),
428–447.

