60. TeaP 2018

Abstracts
of the 60h Conference of Experimental Psychologists

Edited by Alexander C. Schütz, Anna Schubö, Dominik Endres, Harald Lachnit

March, 11th to 14th
Marburg, Germany

This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is
concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in other ways, and storage in data banks. The use of
registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a
specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and
therefore free for general use.
The authors and the publisher of this volume have taken care that the information and
recommendations contained herein are accurate and compatible with the standards generally
accepted at the time of publication. Nevertheless, it is difficult to ensure that all the information given
is entirely accurate for all circumstances. The publisher disclaims any liability, loss, or damage
incurred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application of any of the contents of
this volume.
© 2018 Pabst Science Publishers, 49525 Lengerich, Germany
Printing: KM-Druck, 64823 Groß-Umstadt, Germany

Contents
Keynote lectures __________________________________________________________ 5
Contributions ___________________________________________________________ 11
Author index ___________________________________________________________ 307

Keynote lectures

5

Keynote lectures

Control of Attention in Natural Environments
Mary Hayhoe

Center for Perceptual Systems, The University of Texas at Austin
hayhoe@utexas.edu

In the context of natural behavior, humans must allocate attention and select information from the
visual scene to satisfy behavioral goals. What are the control mechanisms that achieve this? I will
review the factors that control gaze in natural behavior, including evidence for the role of the task,
which defines the immediate goals, the rewards and costs associated with those goals, uncertainty
about the state of the world, and prior knowledge. Visual computations are often highly task-specific,
and evaluation of task relevant state is a central factor necessary for optimal choices of where to
direct gaze. This governs a very large proportion of gaze changes, which reveal the information
sampling strategies of the human visual system. When reliable information is present in memory, the
need for sensory updates is reduced, and humans can rely instead on memory estimates. Thus
memory-based priors constitute another important determinant of natural gaze control.

7

Keynote lectures

Statistical learning drives visual selection
Jan Theeuwes

Experimental and Applied Psychology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Institute for Brain and Behavior Amsterdam (iBBA)
j.theeuwes@vu.nl

Humans are constantly bombarded by streams of sensory information. Selective attention determines
what we attend and what ignore. Traditionally, it was thought that what we attend was determined
by our top-down goals and the physical characteristics of the environment. Recently however, it was
pointed out that this conceptualization may be incomplete as selection is likely to be the result our
experiences, i.e., the history of attentional deployments can elicit lingering selection biases,
unrelated to top-down goals or the physical salience of items. Invariant properties of the visual
environment can bias attention such that we are able to interact more effectively with the visual
world. Previous studies have shown that the efficiency of selecting the target can be improved when
the target consistently appears at specific locations in the display (e.g., contextual cueing). This is not
surprising as the target is relevant for the task and it is known that attention can be directed to
locations in space. In this talk, however, I will specifically focus on how statistical regularities
regarding items that are not relevant for the task (i.e., distractors) affect selection. We show that
through statistical learning, locations that are likely to contain distractors are suppressed relative to
all other locations. These statistical regularities drive selection above and beyond top-down and
bottom-up control and operate without people being aware of them. We argue that statistical
learning induces plasticity in time and place within the spatial priority map such that locations that
are likely to contain a target are boosted and locations that are likely to contain a distractor are
suppressed. It reflects our ability to extract the distributional properties of sensory input across time
and space; one of the most crucial human abilities that plays a role in essentially everything we do.

8

Keynote lectures

Probabilistic models of sensorimotor control and decision making
Daniel Wolpert

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge
wolpert@eng.cam.ac.uk

The effortless ease with which humans move our arms, our eyes, even our lips when we speak masks
the true complexity of the control processes involved. This is evident when we try to build machines
to perform human control tasks. I will review our work on how humans learn to make skilled
movements covering probabilistic models of learning, including Bayesian and structural learning as
well as the role of context in activating motor memories. I will also review our work showing the
intimate interactions between decision making and sensorimotor control processes. This includes the
bidirectional flow of information between elements of decision formations such as accumulated
evidence and motor processes such as reflex gains. Taken together these studies show that
probabilistic models play a fundamental role in human sensorimotor control.

9

Contributions

11

Contributions

Investigating neurophysiological correlates of joint action
Hossein Abbasi, Dominik Dötsch & Anna Schubö

Philipps-Universität Marburg, Psychology department
hossein.abbasi@uni-marburg.de

In social interactions, people often share tasks with others. This type of interaction is usually
examined in joint action tasks in which two humans are asked to perform an experimental task
conjointly. In this research, we aimed to describe neurophysiological correlates of joint action. To
this end, participants performed an orientation discrimination task in either a competitive or
cooperative setting while their EEG data was recorded. On each trial, the display included two
oriented targets with distinct colors indicating if it is the participant’s own target, the partner’s target,
or neutral distractors. One of these stimuli was presented laterally to measure attention deployment
by means of lateralized event-related potential components, while the other stimulus was presented
on the vertical midline. In the ERP analysis, we observed an N2pc component in the parieto-occipital
region when subjects are presented with their own target in Go trials. In the time-frequency analysis
we found that the upper alpha band in the same region is more lateralized in the competitive
condition compared to the cooperative condition. These results indicate that performing a task with a
partner in different social contexts affects the way humans perceive their visual environment.

Swearing and Taboo Word Production: Behavioral and
Electrophysiological Correlates
Rasha Abdel Rahman & Lana Rohr
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
rasha.abdel.rahman@hu-berlin.de

The selection of words that best express intended preverbal messages depends not only on semantic
factors, but also on communicative contexts that determine the social appropriateness of verbal
utterances. Specifically, the mental lexicon contains swear and taboo-words that, albeit being
produced more or less frequently, are highly inappropriate and unwanted in many social situations.
Thus, for the speaker it is essential to assess the appropriateness of planned utterances before
articulation. In the present study we used electrophysiological measures to characterize the
production of swear and taboo words. Compared to well-matched neutral words, swear and taboo
words were produced slower and quieter, suggesting that the potential social inappropriateness
affects pre-articulatory as well as articulatory stages during language production. In ERPs an early
positivity at posterior regions is taken to reflect modulations of lexical access, and a later positivity at
central regions suggests enhanced evaluative processes related to internal speech monitoring. Our
findings demonstrate that the emotional valence and social appropriateness of swears and taboo
words is appraised during speech planning at the level of lexical selection and via self-monitoring at
a later stage. As a result of the latter, swear and taboo words are produced more hesitantly.

13

Contributions

Potential models of allocentric coding for reaching in naturalistic
visual scenes
Parisa Abedi Khoozani1, Mathias Klinghammer2, Paul Schrater3, Dominik Endres4, Katja Fiehler2 &
Gunnar Blohm5
Queen's University, Center for Neuroscience; University of Giessen; 2University of Giessen; 3University of
Minnesota; 4University of Marburg; 5Queen's University
0kpa@queensu.ca
1

Previous studies showed that the combination weight of allocentric and egocentric information is
dependent on contextual factors when planning to reach to visual targets. However, the principles of
this integration and the impact of different parameters are not clear. Therefore, we propose two
modeling paradigms (global vs. local clustering) for allocentric coding to explain reported
experimental data. The first model encodes the scene by creating a cluster point and calculates the
distance of objects from this cluster. The second model creates Barycentric coordinates and encodes
the position of the target object with respect to local clusters of objects. At the decoding phase, the
goal is to infer the position of the target object from a new scene by taking into account remembered
information from encoding. The first model makes this inference by combining the remembered
egocentric cluster point, from encoding, and the new allocentric cluster point extracted from the new
scene. The second model estimates the allocentric position of the missing object based on the new
scene and then combines it with the remembered egocentric position. Both models reproduced the
reported human data. Future experiments should examine which of these strategies, if any, the brain
might use.

Confidence, distance, and consistency: Towards a reliability account of
advice taking
Fabian Ache & Mandy Hütter

Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen
fabian.ache@uni-tuebingen.de

Confidence is both an important determinant and outcome of advice taking. Specifically, lower
confidence increases individuals’ advice weighting. At the same time, advice that is close to an
individual’s initial judgment leads to an increase in confidence. What has not been investigated is
how confidence affects and is affected by advice seeking. Across four experiments, we investigated
individuals’ confidence before and after seeking and taking advice. In all experiments, we
manipulated advice distance either categorically (close vs. distant; Exp. 1 & 2) or continuously (Exp.
3 & 4). Additionally, we manipulated costs of advice (Exp. 2) and consistency of advice among
advisors (Exp. 4). Lower confidence predicts increased advice seeking, beyond distance, costs, and
consistency of advice. Close advice leads to an increase in confidence. Additional sampling
increases this confidence gain, but more so when advice is consistent among advisors. The results
are compatible with the assumption that advice seeking and utilization depend on the reliability (i.e.,
amount and consistency) of individuals’ task-related knowledge and change thereof upon integration
of advice. We propose this change of reliability as a common process underlying the effects of
knowledge, confidence, advice distance, and advisor consistency on advice taking.

14

Contributions

Is it possible to reverse the Spatial Agency Bias?
Katharina Adam, Tobias Vogel & Michaela Wänke

University of Mannheim, Consumer and Economic Psychology
katharina.adam@uni-mannheim.de

Spatial Agency Bias (SAB, Maass, Suitner, & Nadhmi, 2013) refers to people’s tendency to perceive
actions flowing from left to right in western countries. The SAB has multiple consequences with
regard to human perception and cognition. Part of the SAB can be explained by word order. In a
typical active sentence the grammatical subject represents an agent and precedes the object, e.g.,
Luca (subject) insults Giulio (object). Within most western languages, it is also possible to switch
positions of agent and patient by using passive voice. Passive voice will also turn the patient into the
grammatical subject and the agent into the object: E.g. Giulio (subject) was insulted by Luca (object).
In two experiments, grammatical voice (active vs. passive) of a scene description was manipulated in
a within-subject design (study 1) and a between-subject design (study 2). We replicated a preference
for the agent on the left in the active voice condition. In the passive voice condition we found a
preference for the agent on the right. Thus, we found evidence for a reversal of the Spatial Agency
Bias.

The advantage of being less protected: children’s spatial orientation in
the city of Jakarta
Clara Ajisuksmo1, Agustina Hendriati1 & Eva Neidhardt2

Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia, Psychology; 2Universität Koblenz-Landau, FB1
neidhardt@uni-koblenz.de

1

Path integration is a very basic cognitive competence: to update the spatial position while walking.
Self-directed wayfinding experience is needed to develop this competence in children (Neidhardt &
Popp, 2010). In Jakarta, the influence of parental protection on path integration competence was
tested. Additionally, h a mental rotation test (PRT) and children’s embedded figures test (CEFT) were
given. Three groups of pre-school children (n=29) from very poor families were tested in three
different places: The children walked along a path. At three locations on the forward run and on the
same three locations on the way back they were asked to point to the origin of the path. Two of the
groups consisted in children who are used to roam freely in their daily life. They managed this task
extremely well. The third group – with more protective parents – did less well (F(2,27)=9.72, p<.01,
η2=.42). Although there are small significant correlations between spatial tests and path integration
competence (r=.23 for the Picture Rotation Test, r=.35 for the embedded figures test), the experience
of moving freely in everyday life is by far more important to explain path integration performances.
Highly protected children are impaired in developing this very basic spatial competence.

15

Contributions

Unstacking judgments: What response distributions reveal about the
cognitive process in multiple-cue judgments
Rebecca Albrecht1, Janina A. Hoffmann2, Timothy J. Pleskac3, Jörg Rieskamp1 & Bettina von
Helversen4

University of Basel; 2University of Konstanz; 3Max Planck Institute for Human Development; 4University of Zurich
rebecca.albrecht@unibas.ch
1

Exemplar and cue-abstraction models are well-established tools to understand categorization and
judgment processes. However, many models in this area are limited by paying little attention to (1)
the finding that judgments are often the result of a mixture of exemplar and cue-abstraction processes
and (2) that in case of exemplar processes an outcome could be the results of a competitive retrieval
process. We developed a new exemplar-based competition model with cue-abstraction (CX-COM)
that addresses both these limitations. CX-COM assumes that past exemplars compete for retrieval
and the retrieved judgments are adjusted following a cue-abstraction process. We tested the new
model in two experimental studies. Across the two studies we found qualitative response pattern
consistent with CX-COM's predictions. As predicted by a competitive retrieval mechanism underlying
exemplar processing, judgment variability varied systematically with the distance in judgment values
between likely retrieval candidates. Extrapolation and interpolation behavior was consistent with a
cue-abstraction mechanism working in direct conjunction with exemplar retrieval. Qualitative results
are corroborated by a quantitative analysis testing CX-COM against seven competitor models. The
results suggest CX-COM as a viable new model for quantitative judgments and show the importance
of considering variability in addition to mean values in judgment research.

Neo's spoon and Newton's apples: What material properties are part
of object representations?
Lorilei M. Alley, Alexandra C. Schmid & Katja Dörschner
Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Psychologie u. Sportwissenschaft
lorilei.alley@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Through repeated interactions with real-world objects, we develop priors about their properties. We
rely on these priors to efficiently predict future outcomes (e.g. falling wine glasses may shatter),
indicating that prediction ability is critical for survival. We investigated whether observers make
predictions about the kinematics of materials based on object shape and surface properties. Stimuli
were computer-rendered familiar objects (teacup, jelly, chair, etc.) that we hypothesized would
generate strong expectations about their material kinematics when dropped from a height
(shattering, melting, etc.). Utilizing a 'violation-of-expectation' paradigm, participants were shown
videos of an object falling and impacting the ground. The motion was either 'congruent' with the
object and material, behaving as expected (e.g. a falling Jelly wobbled), or 'incongruent', where the
kinematics violated potential predictions (e.g. a falling Jelly wrinkled like cloth). Using a visual rating
scale, observers rated each video on four adjectives: 'hard', 'gelatinous', 'heavy', and 'liquid'. We
find that unexpected outcomes generate larger surprise effects/longer RTs, suggesting that kinematic
properties of materials are an integral part of our representation of familiar objects.

16

Contributions

Evaluative Blocking in EC
Hans Alves, Fabia Högden, Anne Gast & Christian Unkelbach
University of Cologne
hans.alves@uni-koeln.de

Evaluative conditioning describes the transfer of valence from a positive or negative stimulus to a
neutral stimulus by mere co-occurrence (De Houwer, 2007). In research on classical conditioning
and predictor-outcome learning, it is known that learning is not a mere function of CS-US cooccurrences but also influenced by interfering stimulus ccurrences (cue competition, e.g., blocking,
highlighting, overshadowing). However, there is little research on stimulus interference in EC, a fact
that has been described to hinder progress of explanatory concepts in EC (De Houwer, et al.,
2001). The present work is a first step to close this gap and presents a novel, general, and robust
effect of stimulus interference in EC. This effect is driven by the serial position of the CS and the
redundancy of its USs with previously encountered CSs. In 5 experiments, we show that redundant
(i.e., repeated) relative to non-redundant USs have a decreasing influence on the evaluation of the
CS. This effect occurs even though repeated USs do not lose their affective potential and in spite of
participants’ more accurate memory for redundant compared to non-redundant CS-US pairings. We
discuss different possible cognitive processes underlying the effect as well as implications for existing
EC theories.

Impulsivity and inhibitory control in the context of Internetpornography-use disorder
Stephanie Antons & Matthias Brand

University Duisburg-Essen, General Psychology: Cognition
stephanie.antons@uni-due.de

Individuals with Internet-pornography-use disorder (IPD) suffer from a loss of control over their
Internet-pornography consumption albeit experiences of negative consequences. Following a recent
theoretical model, impulsivity and inhibitory control are personality and cognitive factors that
contribute to the development and maintenance of IPD. Moreover, inhibitory control might be
affected by situational factors such as viewing pornographic cues. The current study aimed to
investigate the role of impulsivity and inhibitory control on symptom severity of IPD. Fifty male,
heterosexual, online-pornography users performed a modified stop-signal task measuring impulsive
action tendencies and inhibitory control ability. The task includes two blocks, one with pornographic
and one with neutral pictures. Impulsivity and symptom severity of IPD were assessed using
questionnaires. The results show that males with high impulsivity and with high impulsive action
tendencies when confronted with pornographic material also had higher symptom severity of IPD.
However, this interaction effect of impulsivity and impulsive action tendencies on symptom severity
was not present in the neutral picture condition. Results indicate that cognitive factors in specific
situations such as viewing pornographic cues moderate the effect of personality on symptom severity
of IPD. Results are discussed in the context of underlying neural mechanisms.

17

Contributions

Altered network connectivity in ASD during emotional face processing
Robert Arent1, Kristin M Zimmermann1, Sanna Stroth2, Inge Kamp-Becker2 & Andreas Jansen1

University of Marburg, Department of Psychiatry & Marburg Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior - MCMBB;
Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
Arent@students.uni-marburg.de
1
2

A core symptom of people with Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is weakness in social interaction and
communicative abilities. One obstacle for the development of social skills may be down to an altered
perception of human faces. People with ASD demonstrate difficulties with emotion recognition from
faces and reveal deviant ways of focusing socially relevant face details. These behavioral alterations
in ASD are assumed to arise from aberrant neural mechanisms. Recent structural and functional
imaging studies point toward attenuations of the connectivity between face regions and regions
involved in the processing of emotions in ASD. So far, however, all functional imaging studies
applied correlation analysis techniques. Furthermore, most research focuses the face-dominant right
hemisphere. With a different methodological approach, we investigate the effective connectivity
between bilateral regions of the “core system of face perception” and the amygdala. The method,
dynamic causal modelling (DCM) for fMRI, allows assertions about the direction of informational
transfer, including feedback/feedforward loops. We aimed at differentiating lower-order perceptual
from integrative perceptual-emotional mechanisms. Our results indicate an altered transfer of facial
and emotional information from right to left FFA in people with ASD. Further, we found a reduced
coupling of “core regions” of the face perception system.

When does background knowledge inform causal conditional
reasoning?
Andre Aßfalg & Karl Christoph Klauer
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
andre.assfalg@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

Some judgments involving conditionals (if p, then q) are well approximated with a causal model in
which the antecedent (p) causes the consequent (q). Previous experiments suggest that participants
rely on background knowledge to judge the strength of causal links and the probability of alternative
causes. We tested the use of background knowledge in the suppression paradigm: Participants
judged conditionals without cues or with cues that mentioned additional antecedents or alternative
causes. We further manipulated whether participants could rely on background knowledge to inform
their judgments. Typically, the suppression paradigm produces a distinctive data pattern such that
Modus Ponens, for example, is suppressed if additional antecedents are mentioned. For the present
experiment, we predicted that participants would exhibit the typical suppression pattern if
experimental conditions prevented the use of background knowledge. Conversely, we expected a
weaker suppression effect if participants could rely on their background knowledge. However, these
predictions were not supported by the data. In the present experiment, a typical suppression pattern
appeared, regardless of experimental condition. We conclude that reasoners’ use of relevant
background knowledge and the conditions of its use remain poorly understood and a puzzle for
future research.

18

Contributions

Gaze behavior as an indicator for user competence and state in
human-technology interaction
Christiane Attig & Josef F. Krems

Chemnitz University of Technology, Department of Psychology (Cognitive and Engineering Psychology)
christiane.attig@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de

In a world that is increasingly pervaded by technology, the ability to successfully interact with
technology is of crucial importance for participation in everyday life. However, this interaction
constitutes a challenge for a considerable amount of users with low technological competence. The
growing field of affective computing offers fruitful methods to automatically recognize user
competence and state and subsequently provide tailored assistance. However, rooting user
competence and state recognition into psychological theory is currently incomplete. By introducing a
framework of human-technology interaction from a perspective of self-regulation, we describe the
behavioral and affective outcomes of the interaction between the user and the technical system as a
function of task difficulty and coping resources (e.g., task competence, system competence). As a
first step to experimentally test the framework, we investigated users’ (N = 72) gaze behavior as a
possible information source for automated state and competence recognition. Participants with
different competence levels solved four tasks with varying task difficulty in the statistic software SPSS.
Results indicated that gaze behavior varies with task difficulty, users’ task and system competence as
well as with self-reported user state.

Fixation durations in natural scene viewing are guided by peripheral
content
Charlotte Atzert1, Antje Nuthmann2 & Wolfgang Einhäuser3

Chemnitz University of Technology, Institute of Physics – Physics of Cognition Group; Philipps-University; 2University
of Kiel, Institute of Psychology – Perception and Cognition Group; 3Chemnitz University of Technology, Institute of
Physics – Physics of Cognition Group
wolfgang.einhaeuser-treyer@physik.tu-chemnitz.de
1

Fixation durations provide insights into processing demands; however, for free-viewing of natural
scenes, data on the factors controlling fixation durations are relatively scarce. Here, we investigate
the relationship between fixation durations and image features. In experiment 1, observers viewed
images of natural scenes and experimentally modified versions. We varied scene contrast (from
original contrast to isoluminant) and saturation (from original saturation to grayscale). Fixation
durations increased with decreasing contrast; moreover, at low contrasts, fixation durations were
prolonged when color information was absent. In sum, fixations durations increased when less
information (color or contrast) was available. In experiment 2, we tested whether this difference
resulted from increased processing demands at fixation or from reduced salience at peripheral
locations. We designed “checkerboard” stimuli, for which half of the checks contained the
unmodified scene, while the remaining checks were made isoluminant preserving color. Fixation
durations were substantially prolonged when the next fixation fell on an isoluminant check. By
comparison, the manipulation at current fixation had a small effect. Our results highlight the
importance of peripheral information in controlling fixation durations. The data concur with the
notion that gaze is guided by competition among the current and potential future fixation locations.

19

Contributions

Should I sit or should I stand – On the relevance of motor demands on
decision making under objective risk
Heike Averbeck1, Magnus Liebherr1, Patric Schubert2 & Matthias Brand1

University of Duisburg-Essen, Department of General Psychology: Cognition; 2Hochschule Fresenius, University of
Applied Sciences, Faculty of Health and Social Sciences
heike.averbeck@uni-due.de

1

Previous studies out of the field of decision making focused on the influence of additional cognitive
task performance, stress, diseases, and the process of aging. For some reason the effects of
simultaneously performing motor demands have been widely neglected. However, previous motor /
cognitive dual-task studies provide evidence for both negative as well as facilitating effects of
simultaneously performing cognitive and motor tasks. The study at hand aimed to investigate the
effects of decision making under objective risk while performing additional motor demands. Seventytwo participants ranging from 18-30 years performed the Game of Dice Task either while sitting or
while standing on one leg. The results revealed a significant main effect for 'choice', as well as a
significant interaction of 'choice' x 'group'. People standing on one leg more frequently selected the
most disadvantageous choice (one single number), whereas the sitting group most often selected the
advantageous combination of four numbers. The findings at hand need to be considered under the
aspects of executive functions, working memory, stress and somatic markers. Furthermore, the
findings highlight an increasing relevance of the impulsive system in dual-task decision making under
objective risk.

Is EC possible for objectively aware, but subjectively unaware CSs?
Karoline Corinna Bading & Christoph Stahl
University of Cologne, Department of Psychology
kbading@uni-koeln.de

Evaluative conditioning (EC) refers to the phenomenon that neutral stimuli (CSs) are evaluated more
positively (negatively) after repeated co-occurrence with positive (negative) stimuli. The question of
whether EC can occur under subliminal CS presentation is of great theoretical importance, as
subliminal CS presentation precludes conscious awareness of the CS-US contingency. Propositional
accounts of EC require CS-US contingency awareness and therefore cannot explain subliminal EC.
Establishing EC under subliminal conditions would strongly support the assumption of a second nonpropositional learning process. Previous research did not find subliminal EC when CSs were
presented below the objective awareness threshold. The present research investigates subliminal EC
using a subjective criterion of conscious awareness – participants’ impression of (not) having seen
the CS. Subjective awareness is assumed to lag behind objective awareness, and hence allows for
higher CS durations. It therefore constitutes a fairer test of subliminal conditioning. In a series of
experiments we found that EC was possible under supraliminal conditions with suboptimal visibility,
but obtained mixed results for conditions which were subliminal according to the subjective criterion
of conscious awareness. We discuss potential features of the learning procedure that may moderate
subjectively subliminal EC.

20

Contributions

Simon and his friends: Evidence for multiple reference frames
Pamela Baess & Christina Bermeitinger

University of Hildesheim, Institute of Psychology
baessp@uni-hildesheim.de

Studies using the Simon task have consistently reported faster stimulus-response compatible trials
referring to the compatibility in regard to the body midline of the responding agent (egocentric). We
have recently developed a variant of the Simon task (Baess & Bermeitinger, submitted)
simultaneously allowing the formation of multiple spatial reference frames. Using stick-figure manikins
as stimuli, we found evidence for Simon effects based on the egocentric and allocentric (ball in the
left or right hand of the manikin) reference frame, which were further modulated by a non-spatial
reference frame (one manikin vs. nine manikins). Here, we present a new series of experiments using
photos of human agents as stimuli. In line with those results from the stick-figure manikins, egocentric
and allocentric Simon effects were obtained. However, the allocentric Simon effect was inverted
providing evidence for taking the human agent’s perspective on the photo into account (e.g., my
right hand equals his right hand). Implications will be drawn on basis of the findings from the stickfigure manikin and the human agent experiments.

Language Effects in Top-Down Search for Colors
Diane Baier & Ulrich Ansorge

University of Vienna, Department of Basic Psychological Research and Research Methods
diane.baier@univie.ac.at

To investigate the role of language in top-down search for colors, I compared different color and
color-word stimuli in a series of contingent capture experiments. The contingent capture hypothesis
states that attention capture depends on the match between stimulus and top-down search template.
Attention capture is reflected in shorter search-times for validly than invalidly cued targets, selectively
for top-down matching cues. In experiments 1 and 2, I compared effects of color cues and colorword cues in top-down search for a color target (experiment 1) or a color-word target (experiment
2). Only cues of the same stimulus category as the target (color stimuli/color-word stimuli) captured
attention. In experiment 3, both color and color-word targets were combined in one experiment. In
line with experiments 1 and 2, contingent capture effects emerged exclusively for targets of the same
stimulus category as the cue. These results support feature-based rather than language-based search
templates. In experiment 4, I compared color-word cues of different fonts. As color-word cues
captured attention regardless of the match between cue and target font, search templates cannot
solely be based on feature representations. Further investigations regarding phonological and
semantic aspects will narrow down the role of language in top-down search templates.

21

Contributions

Time course of inhibition in motor imagery
Victoria K. E. Bart1, Iring Koch2 & Martina Rieger1

UMIT, Institute of Psychology; 2RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Psychology
victoria.bart@umit.at
1

Motor imagery (MI) entails the mental simulation of movements without their actual execution. One
mechanism contributing to inhibition of actual execution is effector-specific inhibition. We
investigated the time course of effector-specific inhibition by analyzing trial sequence effects of
imagined and executed hand movements from two start buttons to two target buttons. Response
stimulus intervals (RSIs) were manipulated. Thus, trial sequences differed depending on current action
mode (imagination, execution), previous action mode (imagination, execution), hand (same,
different), target (same, different), and RSIs (200ms, 700ms, 1300ms, 2000ms). Results showed that
in imagination-imagination sequences hand repetition costs occurred at the shortest RSI. This
indicates that effector-specific inhibition occurred in the previous trial, resulting in costs when the
same effector was used in the current trial. With increasing RSIs hand repetition costs decreased and
eventually disappeared, indicating that effector-specific inhibition might decay over time. At the
longest RSIs hand repetition benefits occurred. In execution-execution sequences hand repetition
benefits were observed in all four RSIs. In conclusion, effector-specific inhibition and effector-specific
activation may occur simultaneously in motor imagery. Effector-specific inhibition may be initially
stronger, but may decay faster than effector-specific activation.

Lateralized alpha-power indicates selective forgetting in a retro-cuing
paradigm
Anna Barth1, Edmund Wascher1, Clayton Hickey2 & Daniel Schneider1

Leibniz Institut für Arbeitsforschung an der TU Dortmund (IfADo), Ergonomie; 2Center for Mind/Brain Sciences
(CiMeC), University of Trento
barth@ifado.de
1

Attentional shifts based on retroactive cues (retro-cues) facilitate performance in working memory
(WM) tasks. However, the contribution of target enhancement vs. distractor suppression mechanisms
of attention are still unclear. Therefore, we measured lateralized effects of the EEG during a delayed
estimation WM task. A retro-cue indicated the lateralized or midline item to be required for retrieval.
Analyses revealed an increase of alpha power contralateral to a lateralized item becoming
irrelevant after cuing while no comparable effect was observed when a lateralized target had to be
selected. This indicates the inhibition of the irrelevant information as a core mechanism of selective
attention within working memory. In contrast, target enhancement processes were evident in an
anterior contralateral negative shift of the ERPs. These results enable a first impression on the
interplay of attentional sub-processes in the context of visuo-spatial working memory updating.

22

Contributions

Blind-walking and distance estimation
Julia Bastian

Universität Trier
bastian@uni-trier.de

What happens if pedestrians look at their mobile phones and not at the environment especially the
traffic around them. Not only car drivers but also pedestrians are an important part of the traffic in
cities and cause accidents by not estimating distances correctly. In our field experiment we wanted
to know if participants estimate distances in three blind-walking conditions differently. 90
participants were assigned randomly to three different groups with 30 persons in each group:
walking forward, walking forward and wearing a backpack or walking backward blindly. Each
participant had to guess 8 distances between 4 and 45 meters varied according to a Latin square.
Every person had to walk blindly until the thought reaching of the distance. Experimenters measured
the walked distance. In a 2 distance (short( 4 m, 8 m, 12 m, 16 m, 20 m) vs. long (35 m, 40 m, 45
m)) X 3 conditions MANOVA significant mean effect of distance (F(1, 86) = 383.981, p <.000, ?p2
= .817) and a significant interaction between distances and conditions (F(2, 86) = 4.683, p
=.012*, ?p2 = .098) was found. Post Hoc comparisons of Tukey show a significant difference
between the conditions of blind-walking forward and backward.

Clear moral judgments based on unclear evidence: Person evaluation
is strongly influenced by untrustworthy gossip
Julia Baum, Milena Rabovsky, Sebastian Rose & Rasha Abdel Rahman

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Psychologie, Neurokognitive Psychologie
julia.baum@hu-berlin.de

Affective information about other people’s social behavior may prejudice social interactions and bias
moral judgments. The trustworthiness of person-related information, however, can vary considerably,
as in the case of gossip, rumours, lies, or so-called “fake news”. Here, we investigated how
spontaneous person-likeability and explicit moral judgments are influenced by trustworthiness,
employing event-related potentials as indexes of emotional brain responses. Social-emotional
information about previously unknown persons was verbally presented as trustworthy fact, (e.g. “He
raped a woman”) or marked as untrustworthy gossip (by adding e.g. allegedly). In Experiment 1,
spontaneous likeability, deliberate moral judgments and electrophysiological measures of emotional
person evaluation were strongly influenced by negative information, yet remarkably unaffected by
the trustworthiness of the information. Experiment 2 replicated these findings and extended them to
positive information. Our findings demonstrate a tendency for strong emotional evaluations and
moral judgments even when they are knowingly based on unclear evidence.

23

Contributions

Explaining human decision making in optimal stopping tasks
Christiane Baumann1, Bettina von Helversen1 & Sam Gershman2

University of Zuerich, Department of Psychology; 2Harvard University, Departement of Psychology
c.baumann@psychologie.uzh.ch

1

Optimal stopping problems are a class of decision-making tasks in which people have to choose the
best option out of a set of alternatives. Options are presented sequentially and a rejected option
cannot be recalled. Behavioral research has found that human choices can be described by
threshold strategies. Despite their descriptive strength threshold models are agnostic to the underlying
cognitive processes that guide human behavior in an optimal stopping task. Here, we use a drift
diffusion model (DDM) to understand how preferences change over the sequence and which
cognitive processes drive them. In an online experiment, participants performed a sequential
decision-making task in which they had to find the cheapest airplane ticket out of 10 tickets. We
varied the value of the options and on which positions they were presented. In a second step we
fitted the DDM to the data. The drift rate increased with position in the sequence and cheaper offers.
But neither value nor position had an effect on the bias or threshold parameter. These results suggest
that people may not decrease their decision threshold, but rather discount future options due to
increasing uncertainty over the sequence.

Perzeptuelle Sichtbedingungen beeinflussen unsere Fähigkeit, adäquat
auf ein versagen automatisierter Fahrfunktionen zu reagieren
Martin Baumann1 & Lewis Chuang2

Universität Ulm, Germany; 2Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
lewis.chuang@tuebingen.mpg.de
1

Zukünftige automatisierte Fahrzeuge (d.h., SAE-L3 und höher) sollen es Fahrern ermöglichen,
Aktivitäten auszuführen, die nicht fahrrelevant sind, und dabei ihre Aufmerksamkeit nicht
durchgängig der Überwachung der Fahrsituation widmen zu müssen. Hinter diesem Ziel steht die
implizite Annahme, dass diese automatisierten Fahrzeuge (i) erkennen, wenn sie ihre Systemgrenzen
erreichen bzw. ausfallen, und (ii) die Fahrer rechtzeitig zur Übernahme der Fahraufgabe auffordern.
Die Frage dieses Forschungsprojekts ist: Können Fahrer adäquat eingreifen, wenn die Automation
versagt und die Fahrer mit einer fahrirrelevanten Aktivität beschäftigt sind und keine Warnung durch
die Automation erfolgte, weil sie ihr Versagen nicht erkannte? 20 Teilnehmer führten während einer
simulierten Fahrt mit einem automatisierten Fahrzeug in einem Fahrsimulator eine verbale komplexe
Gedächtnisspannen-Aufgabe aus und mussten eingreifen, sobald die Automation ohne Warnung
ausfiel. Die Sichtbedingungen wurden variiert (klar vs. nebelig) und ein LED-Display zeigte die
augenblickliche Reliabilität der Automation an (niedrig vs. hoch). Die Ergebnisse zeigen, dass die
Teilnehmer schneller unter nebeligen Sichtbedingungen auf ein Automationsversagen reagierten als
bei klarer Sicht. Die angezeigte Reliabilität der Automation hatte keinen Effekt. Diese ersten
Ergebnisse weisen darauf hin, dass Umweltbedingungen, die die Fähigkeit, rechtzeitig einzugreifen,
beeinflussen, einen größeren Einfluss auf das Übernahmeverhalten haben als präsentierte
Informationen über die Ausfallwahrscheinlichkeit der Automation.

24

Contributions

I'm all ears: ERPs and pupil size in response to learning novel labels
for novel sounds
Markéta Becevová, Natalia Esther Brandwayn, Scheng Yang Chong, Maria del Mar Cordero Rull,
Matteo Mascelloni, Marisa Ortlieb, Leonardo Pimpini, Susanne Schuberth, Paola Suarez Ramirez &
Jutta L Mueller
Universität Osnabrück
nbrandwaynbr@uni-osnabrueck.de

Previous research using behavioural measures or ERPs has shown that the meaning of words can be
learned by a variety of cues and procedures. Yet, whether and how the modality of the referential
cue impacts on the outcome of measures of learning has not been investigated up to date. In order to
address this gap, we tested the lexical-semantic learning abilities of adults during word-sound
association learning. Participants’ EEG and pupil size were recorded during an experiment with a
training phase and a subsequent testing phase. The training phase was composed of a passive
listening task in which participants were exposed to consistent and inconsistent word-sound pairs.
The following testing phase contained congruent and incongruent pairs from both item categories.
We will report learning-related changes over time and effects related to consistency of sound pairs.
Further, the reported data will show whether the expected ERP measure, the N400, is correlated to
pupil size during learning and testing. The data will provide first evidence on how novel meanings
related to non-visual referents can be mapped to novel words. Further research could aim to study
this specific associative learning modality in different age ranges and contexts.

The role of sensorimotor experience in the formation of novel word
meanings
Laura Bechtold1, Marta Ghio1, Gerald Antoch2, Bernd Turowski2, Hans-Jörg Wittsack2, Marco
Tettamanti3 & Christian Bellebaum1

Heinrich-Heine-University, Biological Psychology; 2Heinrich-Heine-University, Diagnostic and Interventional
Radiology; 3IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Nuclear Medicine and Division of Neuroscience
labec100@hhu.de
1

Embodied cognition theories postulate that conceptual processing partly recruits the same brain
areas as the experience with the concept’s referent. Supportive evidence arose from training-studies,
in which laboratory-controlled experiential information was integrated in conceptual representations
of novel objects. This study aimed to extend these findings to the linguistic domain. In three training
sessions, 22 participants gained active manipulation or merely visual experience with novel tool-like
objects while learning names (pseudo-words) referring to the objects. In a post-training fMRI session,
the novel object names had to be distinguished from unfamiliar pseudo-words in a lexical decision
task. Novel object names activated a broad semantic network comprising frontal, parietal and
temporal regions, mirroring the activation pattern elicited by processing real object names. Pseudoword processing elicited medial-superior parietal activations when compared to novel as well as real
object names. Thus, training seemingly induced word meaning by linking novel names to newly
formed conceptual object representations, comparable to real word meaning. However, the
activation pattern did not differentiate between manipulation and visual experience. The activation
elicited by novel object name processing after three training sessions seemingly reflects a preliminary
stage in conceptual representation formation, not yet distinguishing between the types of experiential
information.

25

Contributions

HPA axis and SNS activity are differentially related to the primacy
and recency effect of the serial position curve
Linda Becker, Kristina Sinner & Nicolas Rohleder

Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Institute of Psychology
linda.becker@fau.de

The aim of our study was to investigate whether the diurnal rhythm of cortisol, as an indicator for
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activity, or the diurnal rhythm of salivary alpha-amylase
(sAA), as an index for the activity of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), are related with longterm memory or working memory performance in adults with subclinical levels of chronic stress. For
this purpose, the primacy effect and the recency effect of the serial position curve were investigated.
Participants were n = 67 healthy adults who reported that they did not perceive their lives as stressful
(mean age: 24.9 ± 8.4 years; n = 23 male). For cortisol, the area under the curve (AUC), as an
index of whole daily cortisol concentration, was negatively related with the primacy effect (as an
indicator for long-term memory performance; r = -.28, p < .05). For sAA, positive relationships were
found of AUC and diurnal increase of sAA concentrations throughout the day with the recency effect
(as an indicator for working memory capacity; r = .25 and r = .29, both p < .05). We conclude that
both stress pathways affect long-term memory and working memory processes differently.

The link between social categorization and prejudice: A matter of the
situationally activated mental contents?
Manuel Becker1, Sarah Teige-Mocigemba2, Jeffrey W. Sherman3 & Karl Christoph Klauer1

Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Psychologie, Abteilung für Sozialpsychologie und Methodenlehre;
Philipps-Universität Marburg, Fachbereich Psychologie, AG Persönlichkeit und Diagnostik; 3University of California,
Davis, Department of Psychology, Social Cognition Lab
manuel.becker@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

1
2

Previous research has produced conflicting evidence for the extent to which social categorization
contributes to a person’s prejudice apart from being a necessary condition for it (cf., e.g., Park &
Judd, 2005). In two studies (joint N=200), one exploratory, the other confirmatory, we advance the
hypothesis that the context in which outgroup members are encountered is an important moderator of
the relationship between categorization and prejudice: More specifically, the amount to which
participants process category information in a discussion in the “Who Said What?” paradigm
(Taylor et al., 1978) covering topics where it is an asset to be black was reliably associated with
positive evaluations of blacks in an Evaluative Decision Task (Fazio et al., 1995). This association
was reversed for topics where it might be seen a detriment to be black. We suggest several avenues
how subsequent research might explore the causal relationship between categorization and
prejudice (e.g., does the extent of prejudice determine the extent to which people process either
negative or positive information about the outgroup?). So far, we interpret our tentative results as
suggesting that categorization needs to remain a viable player in theoretical accounts of prejudice.

26

Contributions

The effect of auditory distractors on face recognition
Raoul Bell, Jan Philipp Röer, Laura Mieth & Axel Buchner
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf
raoul.bell@hhu.de

It is well established that verbal short-term memory is disrupted by auditory distractors. The changingstate effect refers to the observation that sequences of different auditory distractors disrupt
performance more than distractor repetitions. The interference-by-process account claims that the
automatic processing of the auditory distractors selectively interferes with the short-term maintenance
of order information. The attentional account, in contrast, assumes that distraction occurs because
attention is diverted away from the primary task, suggesting that the auditory distractors generally
disrupt memory binding. Here, we examined whether face recognition is affected by the presentation
of auditory distractors at encoding. Faces were encoded either in quiet or while word repetitions or
short sentences had to be ignored. In a subsequent face recognition test, faces encoded in quiet
were better recognized than faces encoded in background noise, suggesting that the binding of
facial features was impaired by auditory distraction. Face recognition was more impaired by
sentences than by word repetitions, showing that the changing-state effect generalizes beyond verbal
material. The results have important theoretical as well as applied implications that are discussed.

Reward Driven Visual Attentional Capture in Adult ADHD Patients
Philipp Matthias Berg1, Hanna Christiansen2 & Anna Schubö3

Philipps-Universität Marburg, Psychologie; 2Child- and Youth Psychology, Philipps-University Marburg; 3Experimental
and Biological Psychology, Philipps-University Marburg
philipp.berg@staff.uni-marburg.de

1

Clinical research on ADHD demonstrates that patients with ADHD process reward different
compared to healthy controls. Studies on visual selective attention have demonstrated that reward
can influence visual search performance in various ways e.g. distractors signaling reward can
decrease search performance. We assumed that search performance might decrease stronger in
patients with ADHD than in healthy controls. A visual search task was adopted from a study by
Feldman-Wüstefeld, Brandhofer and Schubö (2016). It consisted of homogenous or heterogeneous
contexts in which an orientation target and a colored distractor were embedded. After each correct
trial participants were given a monetary reward that depended on the color of the distractor. Target
response times and questionnaire data were assessed. Preliminary results showed prolonged
response times for targets in heterogeneous and homogenous context in the ADHD group compared
to the control group. However, contrary to our assumption, no reward induced interference was
observed for the ADHD group in comparison to the healthy controls. From these results we conclude
that patients with ADHD take longer than healthy controls to acquire reward contingencies.

27

Contributions

Evaluative conditioning of neutral stimuli does not modulate conflict
adaptation
Anja Maria Berger1, Rico Fischer2 & Gesine Dreisbach1

University of Regensburg, Institute for Psychology; 2University of Greifswald, Institute for Psychology
anja.berger@psychologie.uni-regensburg.de

1

There is much evidence that cognitive conflicts are experienced as aversive (c.f., Dreisbach &
Fischer, 2015). A recent study suggests that the subjective affective conflict experience modulates
sequential conflict adaptation (Fröber, Frömer, Stümer & Dreisbach, 2017). To gather more insight
into this functional role of the aversive conflict signal, we directly manipulated the affective valence
of single stimuli by way of evaluative conditioning (EC). In two experiments, during an EC phase,
four stimuli were consistently paired with affective (Experiment 1: negative; Experiment 2: positive)
pictures, and four stimuli with neutral pictures. These stimuli (without pictures) were used for a
subsequent Simon-conflict task. Reaction times (RT) and error rates were analyzed according to EC in
trial N-1 (yes/no), compatibility in N-1 (compatible/incompatible), and compatibility in N. Results of
both experiments showed increased Simon effects following affective EC stimuli (in RTs and errors)
which was driven mainly by increased conflict effects following compatible trials. The typical
reduction of the Simon effect following incompatible trials was virtually unaffected by EC. While EC
stimuli did not affect conflict adaptation, the lack of specific valence effects suggests that EC created
rather unspecific distraction than variation in subjective conflict experience and calls for further
experimentation.

Assessing the nature of ambivalent attitudes: Can positive and
negative valence be activated simultaneously?
Katharina Theresa Berger1, Mandy Hütter1 & Olivier Corneille2
Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen; 2Université catholique de Louvain
katharina-theresa.berger@uni-tuebingen.de

1

We conducted two studies (N1 = 77, N2 = 80) to test a central assumption of attitude ambivalence
research: ambivalent attitude objects automatically and simultaneously trigger positive and negative
evaluative reactions. In both experiments, participants completed two evaluative priming paradigms,
in which ambivalent stimuli served either as primes or as targets. The ambivalent targets paradigm
tested the degree to which positivity or negativity is activated in ambivalent targets depending on
prime valence. In contrast, the ambivalent primes paradigm tested the degree to which the
concurrent and unintentional activation of positivity and negativity influences responding to univalent
targets. In a multilevel analysis, both paradigms in both studies yielded response inhibition for
ambivalent trials that resulted in response times similar to incongruent trials. Furthermore, ambivalent
targets were equally often classified as positive and negative, the findings for dependency on prime
valence, however, were inconsistent across the studies. Our findings lend original empirical support
to the assumption that positivity and negativity are activated simultaneously in ambivalent attitude
objects, thereby resulting in a response conflict that has to be resolved.

28

Contributions

Modulation of context learning by anticipated reward magnitude
Nils Bergmann, Dennis Koch & Anna Schubö

Philipps-University Marburg, Cognitive Neuroscience of Perception and Action, Department of Psychology
nils.bergmann@uni-marburg.de

Anticipated reward can bias selective attention in visual search. There is evidence that also learning
of context regularities can be modulated by expected reward magnitudes, although results have
been ambiguous. We examined the influence of anticipated reward magnitudes on context
configuration learning in a visual search task. Participants performed a contextual cueing task in
which half of the context configurations were repeated over the course of the experiment and the
other half was novel in each trial. In all context configurations some context elements were colored.
Color was neither response relevant nor predictive of the target location but signaled reward
magnitude, with reward transferring into a monetary bonus. Results showed faster responses to the
targets presented in repeated compared to novel context configurations, an effect which was further
speeded in those contexts that were associated with high reward compared to medium or low
reward magnitude. In addition to faster response times, eye movements indicated that this effect went
along with modulations of the first fixation, which landed closer to the individual target location
when contexts were associated with high reward. These results provide evidence for prioritized
attention guidance dependent on the expected reward magnitude.

The Influence of Perceived Remorse on Source Memory for Faces: A
Multinomial Processing Tree Approach
Jana Berkessel1 & Friederike Funk2

University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology; 2University of Cologne, Department of Psychology
jana.berkessel@uni-mannheim.de
1

Whether a face is perceived as remorseful can have mitigating effects on punishment judgments
(e.g., MacLin, Downs, MacLin, Caspers, 2009). Yet, little is known about underlying memory
processes for these faces. Previous findings on memory processes may suggest both a memory
advantage for remorseful, emotional faces (e.g., Cahill & McGaugh, 1995, for emotional stimuli)
and for remorseless, threatening faces (e.g., Kensinger, 2009, for threatening stimuli). Funk and
Englich (2016) demonstrated a non-existent recognition sensitivity for remorseful faces, on the one
hand, and a memory advantage for remorseless faces, on the other hand. However, this research
did not vary facial expressions in the recall phase, making it impossible to interpret whether
participants remembered the facial expression or the person expressing it. Using a source memory
paradigm, the current study allows differentiating between item memory and source memory for the
facial expression of remorse or the lack thereof. It investigates whether participants remember the
facial expression of remorseful faces but the person behind the expression for remorseless faces, as
people who are remorseless still pose a threat to oneself.

29

Contributions

Green as a cbemcuru: visual color cues can help to solve anagrams
Eduard Berndt, Carolin Dudschig & Barbara Kaup
University of Tübingen, Department of Psychology
eduard.berndt@uni-tuebingen.de

A growing number of empirical studies on language comprehension suggest that multimodal
experiential traces (auditory, visual or motor) associated with a word’s referent are activated upon
reading or hearing a word. The corresponding influence in the opposite direction has received far
less attention: Can a sufficient activation of these experiential traces also activate certain words that
are associated with them? To investigate this, we conducted a web-browser based experiment,
where participants had to solve anagrams, resulting from scrambling the letters of a word, with the
solution word’s referent being strongly associated with a particular color (e.g., cucumber being
associated with the color green). Prior to presenting each anagram, a color patch was shown, either
matching or mismatching the color associated with the solution word’s referent. Solution times for the
anagram task were shorter in the matching than in the mismatching condition, indicating that a
matching color cue indeed facilitated access to the solution words. These results further strengthen
the notion that multimodal experiential traces play an important role in language comprehension and
expand upon the results of earlier studies on anagram solution tasks by showing an influence of
modal traces on anagram solution times.

Lifespan Cognition
Daniel M. Bernstein1 & Daniel G. Derksen2

Kwantlen Polytechnic University; 2Simon Fraser University
dbernste@kpu.ca

1

This study explored cognition across the lifespan. Participants (N = 560, Range = 3 – 89 years;
62% female) completed a battery of tasks measuring language ability, executive function (inhibitory
control and working memory), social cognition (theory of mind and hindsight bias), and decision
making (sunk-cost fallacy and risk aversion). Wherever possible, all participants completed the
identical tasks. Data from year 1 of a 4-year longitudinal project reflect different developmental
patterns for different constructs. Language ability, working memory, and theory of mind improved
with age. Performance on the sunk-cost fallacy declined with age. Hindsight bias and risky decision
making followed U-shaped patterns: Preschoolers and older adults showed more hindsight bias and
less risky decision-making than older children and younger adults. These different developmental
patterns likely result from differences in crystallized versus fluid intelligence across the lifespan.

30

Contributions

Hierarchical modeling of mechanisms underlying the sleep benefit in
episodic memory: Disentangling storage and retrieval contributions
Sabrina Berres, Edgar Erdfelder & Julian Quevedo Pütter

University of Mannheim, Department for Cognitive Psychology and Individual Differences
sberres@mail.uni-mannheim.de

Previous research has shown that sleep enhances episodic memory. One explanation of this finding
maintains that sleep reduces retroactive interference. Because retroactive interference has been
shown to be associated with retrieval problems, sleep should improve retrieval from memory
according to this explanation. A more recent explanation states that labile memory traces are
stabilized during sleep, resulting in memory consolidation. Hence, this explanation predicts that
sleep improves storage. To disentangle storage and retrieval contributions, we propose the
Encoding-Maintenance-Retrieval multinomial model which provides separate measures for successful
encoding of word-pair associations (e), maintaining encoded associations across the retention
interval (m), and retrieving stored associations (r). We manipulated (1) sleep vs. wakefulness during
retention and (2) ease-of-retrieval at test experimentally. Our results support the model’s validity by
showing that ease-of-retrieval affects the retrieval probability r selectively. We also found that sleep
improves both storage (m) and retrieval (r). By using a hierarchical modeling approach, we account
for individual differences in encoding, maintenance and retrieval as well as their variances and
correlations. Moreover, this approach allows us to relate those differences to chronobiological
differences in the preference towards Morningness or Eveningness.

Beliefs versus Fluency? Comparison of the Mechanisms Underlying the
Perceptual Fluency Finding through Object Images
Miri Besken

Bilkent University, Psychology Department
mbesken@bilkent.edu.tr

In recent years, research has typically shown that perceptually fluent stimuli produce higher
judgments of learning (=JOLs ) than perceptually disfluent stimuli. This finding is sometimes explained
by subjective online disfluencies that the participant experiences during the encoding of disfluent
stimuli. In contrast, analytic processing hypothesis claims that participants generate certain beliefs
about the ongoing task and they rate the memorability of the stimuli according to these beliefs. In the
current study, objects images were presented to the participants in three conditions in a within
subjects design: intact, half and fragmented presentation. Participants were asked to identify the
objects as quickly as they can, followed by JOL ratings during encoding. At test, they were instructed
to recall the names of the objects. Participants identified the fragmented objects significantly slower
than the other two conditions. However, they gave the lowest JOL ratings to half-presented objects.
Hence, identification latency and JOLs were not linearly correlated. Free-recall did not significantly
differ across encoding conditions. The lack of linear relationship between the JOLs and identification
latency provides support for the analytic processing theory.

31

Contributions

Does it pay to pay? Experimental evidence on cognitive control by
monetary rewards versus response strategies
Maik Bieleke1, Michael Dambacher1, Ronald Hübner1 & Peter M Gollwitzer2

University of Konstanz, Department of Psychology; 2New York University, Department of Psychology
maik.bieleke@uni-konstanz.de

1

Monetary rewards can increase the efficiency of cognitive control. It is, however, unclear whether
simple response strategies can achieve similar effects. We addressed this question with a Flanker
paradigm in which target stimuli flanked by (response-congruent or response-incongruent) distractors
had to be categorized as quickly and accurately as possible. Participants either received larger
monetary rewards for efficiently categorizing a critical versus non-critical targets (reward condition)
or formed an if-then response strategy to categorize the critical target efficiently (strategy condition).
When targets did not belong to the set of distractor stimuli (Experiment 1), participants in both
conditions were similarly able to categorize the critical target more efficiently than non-critical
targets. However, differences between conditions emerged when the same set of stimuli was used for
targets and distractors (Experiment 2). Compared to participants in the strategy condition,
participants in the reward condition were more heavily influenced by a critical target appearing as
distractor (i.e., amplification of the congruency effect). Our results suggest that both monetary
rewards and simple response strategies can foster the efficiency of cognitive control. Yet, compared
to response strategies, monetary rewards seem to promote more stimulus-driven processes, which are
less sensitive to task demands.

Action verb – reaction – interaction: behavioural and brain data
Katja Biermann-Ruben, Anne Klepp, Valentina Niccolai & Alfons Schnitzler

Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Institut für Klinische Neurowissenschaften und Medizinische Psychologie
Katja.Biermann-Ruben@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

If and how the brain areas responsible for primary modalities such as vision, audition,
somatosensation and motor execution are involved in concept formation and language processing
has been a matter of debate for quite some time - and still is. Our group further explored the
processing of action verbs in different experimental setups using language processing and motor
execution interaction paradigms. Behavioural and neurophysiological data point at a substantial
overlap of neuronal engagement for language processing and movement execution. Behaviourally,
prolongation of reaction times emerges when short SOAs between language stimulus and response
cue (˜ 150 ms) are implemented thus suggesting interference mechanisms. On the other hand
facilitation effects are observed for longer SOAs of about 400 ms. Interaction processes also appear
in the modulation of 20-Hz beta-frequency range neuronal oscillations. Decreased beta suppression
appears to be a correlate of overlapping cortical activation induced by the semantic congruency
between a linguistic stimulus and the response effector. Some effects are only present in highperforming subjects, which points at a further role of attentional processes. We conclude that
conceptual language processing recruits primary processing areas (here: motor), however the
amount depends on task details such as stimulus timing and cognitive requirements.

32

Contributions

Age-related differences in gesture perception and production
Jutta Billino1, Miriam Steines2, Arne Nagels3, Tilo Kircher2 & Benjamin Straube2

Allgemeine Psychologie, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen; 2Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Philipps-Universität
Marburg; 3Allgemeine und Vergleichende Sprachwissenschaft, Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz
jutta.billino@psychol.uni-giessen.de
1

Communication is challenged with increasing age due to sensory loss and decline of cognitive
resources, e.g. attention and working memory. Gestures play a crucial role in maintaining
communication. They help speakers to express their thoughts and also facilitate understanding of
spoken language. Thus, gestures could provide a compensatory mechanism during ageing.
However, age-related changes in gesture use in communication situations are largely unexplored.
We aimed to investigate individual differences in gesture use across the adult lifespan and putative
links to cognitive capacities. We applied a recently introduced gesture scale that assesses selfreported gesture production and perception in everyday communication situations to a sample of
204 participants ranging in age from 20 to 83 years. In addition, we characterized all participants
comprehensively with regard to their cognitive capacities. We found a significant negative
correlation between age and total scores in the gesture scale (r=-.23, p<.01). Increasing age was
associated with a reduced use of gestures. Regression models showed that variation in gesture use
was not explained by individual cognitive resources. Our results question a compensatory role of
gestures in communication in old age. They indicate specialized functional mechanisms underlying
gesture use that are prone to age-related decline.

Post-warnings can undo stereotype-induced memory distortion
Hartmut Blank, Lauren Rutter & Rebecca Armstrong
University of Portsmouth
hartmut.blank@port.ac.uk

Research demonstrating memory distortion is abundant, but its temporal stability is hardly explored
(pointing to a default assumption that, once distorted, a memory will remain distorted). Extending
demonstrations that the eyewitness misinformation effect can be undone after a post-warning about
the presence of misinformation (Oeberst & Blank, 2012), the present research found that stereotype
influence on memory can be similarly undone. Participants remembered details of self-descriptions of
two persons who were labelled as a vicar or builder, leading to stereotype-consistent memory
distortions in an initial multiple-choice recognition test (compared to a no-label condition). A week
later, a post-warning that we had made up these labels eliminated the stereotype effect and restored
memory for the correct details. We discuss theoretical implications.

33

Contributions

Identification of Linear, Exponential, and Step Function Trends in
Scatterplots: Detecting Straight Lines Straightforward
Christine Blech & Robert Gaschler

FernUniversität in Hagen, Department of General Psychologie (Learning, Motivation, Emotion)
christine.blech@fernuni-hagen.de

Scatterplots have a high impact in communicating scientific results. While in natural sciences
"graphism" is considered as the gold standard, psychologists often doubt the credibility of graphical
representations and favor the apparent exactness of p-value statistics. For the present study three
curve shapes (linear, exponential, step) combined with two trends (rising, falling) were transferred
into scatterplots by adding random noise of four different intensity degrees to the y-axis values. An
online experiment (N = 237) demonstrated that in a forced choice format plots with higher noise
intensity were misclassified more often along with lower subjective confidence. The hypothesis that
linear trends in scatterplots are detected more easily than other shapes was confirmed for the
pairwise comparison between linear and step function plots. Regarding linear vs. exponential
function plots the hypothesis was confirmed for confidence ratings, but not for the actual
identification performance. The results suggest that possibly based on familiarity and expectation
there is a linearity bias in the perception of scatterplots and a tendency to neglect the presence of
step functions. Future recommendations include investigating the effect of context information on this
bias in order to use the full potential of graphical representation of data in science.

Perceived Ownership Influences Perspective Taking Towards Avatars
Christian Böffel & Jochen Müsseler

RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Psychology
boeffel@psych.rwth-aachen.de

Avatars are artificial representatives of actors in a virtual world. When interacting with avatars in
computer applications, we can identify two types of avatars: Avatars that are controlled by the actor,
and avatars that are controlled by others. Visual perspective taking is a valuable tool to plan our
actions through the avatar or to understand the actions of avatars controlled by others. This study
used the concept of stimulus-response compatibility to examine the influence of perceived ownership
on visual perspective taking. Participants were confronted with an avatar that was sitting opposite to
them. Key presses caused movements of the corresponding avatar hand. Two groups of participants
were given different instructions of the same experimental sequence. A high ownership instruction
underlined the participants control over the avatar, a low ownership instruction established the
avatar as an independent agent. An ownership questionnaire revealed higher levels of perceived
ownership in the high ownership group. The high ownership group showed a benefit of spatially
non-corresponding stimulus-response sets that indicated visual perspective taking. This effect was
absent in the low-ownership condition. These results support the idea that higher perceived
ownership benefits visual perspective taking.

34

Contributions

Nighttime sleep benefits prospective memory by improving its
prospective component
Mateja F. Böhm1, Ute J. Bayen1 & Reinhard Pietrowsky2

Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Department of Mathematical and Cognitive Psychology; 2Heinrich-HeineUniversität Düsseldorf, Department of Clinical Psychology
mateja.boehm@hhu.de

1

Remembering to carry out intentions at the appropriate time requires prospective memory (PM). PM
consists of a prospective component (remembering that something needs to be done) and a
retrospective component (remembering what and when it needs to be done). Nighttime sleep
benefits PM (Scullin & McDaniel, 2010). Here, we investigated whether this benefit is due to the
prospective and/or the retrospective component. To disentangle the components, we used the
multinomial model of event-based PM (Smith & Bayen, 2004). Sixty-two participants formed an
intention in the morning or in the evening and stayed awake during the day or slept at night,
respectively. Twelve hours after intention formation, each group performed a standard event-based
PM test. To control for time-of-day effects, participants also performed a PM test during their first
session. After the retention interval, the sleep group showed a stronger prospective component than
the wake group. Moreover, in the wake group, the prospective component showed a steeper decline
from the first to the second session. There were no time-of-day effects in the prospective component.
Hence, this component benefitted from sleep. The retrospective component did not benefit from
sleep. Implications for theories of sleep and PM will be discussed.

Law Students' Judgments of a Rape Victim's Statement: The Role of
Displays of Emotion and Acceptance of Sexual Aggression Myths
Gerd Bohner & Evelyn Schapansky

Universität Bielefeld, Department of Psychology
gerd.bohner@uni-bielefeld.de

Research has shown that victims of rape who display appropriate emotions (versus inappropriate or
no emotions) may be judged to be more credible. The authors studied the interplay of a victim's
emotion displays with perceivers' acceptance of modern myths about sexual aggression (AMMSA) in
predicting judgments of credibility and blame. Law students (N = 120) completed an AMMSA scale
and watched a videotape of a rape victim (an actress) during a simulated interview. The emotion
displayed by the victim (sad, angry, or neutral) was experimentally manipulated; her statement's
verbal content was held constant. Dependent variables (DVs) were perceived credibility, victim
blame, and severity of the case. Results showed that AMMSA strongly predicted all DVs across
conditions. Effects of the displayed emotions were less pervasive and depended on participants'
gender and AMMSA: For example, only women high in AMMSA (but not women low in AMMSA or
men) judged the sad victim's statement to be most credible and the angry victim's statement to be
least credible, with the neutral statement falling in between. The findings suggest that perceivers may
be better able to avoid unwanted external influences (the emotional displays) than unwanted internal
influences (their own AMMSA).

35

Contributions

Morphosyntactic processing in a masked priming paradigm
Johannes Bommes1, Ulrich Ansorge2 & Maximilian Stein3

Georg August University Goettingen; 2University of Vienna, Faculty of Psychology; 3Georg August University
Goettingen, Department of Experimental Psychology
johannes.bommes@stud.uni-goettingen.de
1

We used a masked priming paradigm to examine morphosyntactic processing of written German
relative clauses in a syntactic decision task. After presenting a noun, the relative clause was
introduced by a relative pronoun that was followed by a personal pronoun and a verb (e.g., Die
Jacke, die mir passt). The sentences were either syntactically correct or incorrect based on a
variation of the morphosyntactic form of the personal pronoun (prime) and the verb (target). The
syntactic violations concerned the agreement of case (prime - target mismatch), of number (noun target mismatch), or of both. Forty percent of the primes were masked by a random sequence of five
numerals, displayed after the offset of the prime. In masked trials, we found a significant prime-target
congruency effect on reaction time. This effect was only found in syntax-correct judgments of nounverb congruent sentences but not in syntax-incorrect judgments of noun-verb incongruent sentences.
Visibility of masked primes was measured indirectly yielding a mean sensitivity exceeding zero (d‘ =
0.23). However, a linear regression suggested no association existed between congruency effect
and prime visibility.

The impact of shared mental models on team performance in a fault
diagnosis task
Rica Bönsel1, Luise Schegner2, Sebastian Heinze2, Leon Urbas2 & Romy Müller1

TU Dresden, Professur Ingenieurpsychologie und angewandte Kognitionsforschung; 2TU Dresden, Professur
Prozessleittechnik
rica.boensel@tu-dresden.de

1

In the process industries, control room operators and a field operators have to closely work together
to diagnose faults in the plant. There is a high risk of problems as the partners are physically
separated, have access to different types of information, and must rely on verbal communication.
Shared mental models are considered to facilitate team interaction, but previous research has only
collected information on the similarity of mental models post-hoc. The present study directly
manipulated the similarity of team members' task models and team models by varying the amount of
knowledge participants received during an instruction phase. Three groups of ten participants had to
jointly diagnose five technical faults in a simulated plant, and either shared a task model, a team
model, or models of both team and task. Performance and communication data was evaluated.
Teams who only shared a team model violated work safety rules more often than teams that shared
both models. Other performance measures (e.g., time on task, number of correct diagnoses) did not
differ between groups. These findings suggest that it can be beneficial to train all team members on
the complete team task instead of teaching them only their own responsibilities.

36

Contributions

Replication and Validation of an experimental paradigm of measuring
open-earedness
Isabell Bötsch1 & Richard von Georgi2

University of Technology Braunschweig; 2SHR Hochschule der populären Künste
i.boetsch@tu-bs.de

1

Open-earedness is often defined or operationalized by valence for specific music stimuli. Many of
these valence oriented approaches can be criticized for a lack in theoretical framework and
methodological problems. Referring to openness to experience and related traits the so called
decision making paradigm defines open-earedness as an open behavior to music which could be
measured by the variation in self-chosen music categories (von Georgi & Frieler, 2014). Aim of this
study is the replication and validation of the decision making paradigm. The sample consists of 242
subjects (51.3 % females) with a mean age of 30.87 (SD=17.94; min=12; max=83). All subjects
were asked to choose a piece of music considering their own individual preferences and interests out
of a pool of music-categories (genres) and to rate their valence. After 15 times of decision-making
and listening the subjects conducted the NEO-FFI and the Sensations Seeking Scale V as well as
some questions about demographics and music preferences. Openness to Experience and
Experience Seeking (depending on age) seems to predict the variation in decisions for music
categories and therefore an open behavior toward music by a medium effect. Open-earedness also
seems to be independent of age.

Contingency Learning and Choice-Behavior Based on Self-Directed and
Other-Directed Information Sampling
Franziska Bott & Thorsten Meiser

University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology
f.bott@uni-mannheim.de

In order to properly determine contingencies, one needs to use joint frequencies of the involved
variables. Yet, studies on contingency learning show that this co-occurrence-information is not readily
considered by participants, resulting in possibly distorted contingency judgments such as
pseudocontingencies that are based on base rates (Fiedler, Freytag, & Meiser, 2009). In these
studies, participants are usually exposed to predetermined learning trials in which all variables are
presented. However, in more natural situations, this is rarely the case. In two experiments, we
investigated to what extent the information observed after a series of learning trials differs when
information sampling was self-directed versus other-directed and whether this results in different
contingency judgments. We manipulated whether information regarding contexts, options, and
outcomes was sampled by the participant or predetermined by the experimenter. The results show
that participants preferred the context and the option with the higher reward. Estimates of the
contexts' winning probabilities also reflected the true contingency with the outcomes. Likewise, the
preference for the context with the higher reward was already apparent in the sampling behavior.
Experiment 2 constitutes an extension in which the salience of context-dependent base rates as a
potential moderator was additionally manipulated.

37

Contributions

Context-specific instruction implementation
Senne Braem

Ghent University
senne.braem@ugent.be

It is a uniquely human ability to quickly use and implement verbal instructions to (re)configure new
task sets. It can be argued that the processes implicated in implementing new task instructions can be
placed at the top of the hierarchy of cognitive control. In doing so, some might be tempted to ascribe
these processes to an independent, domain-general, supervisory executive system responsible for
correcting and (re)configuring task sets. However, a learning perspective on cognitive control
suggests that all control processes are not independent, but, instead, are embedded in more lowlevel forms of learning and thus sensitive to contextual triggering. This study investigated whether the
rapid implementation of novel task instructions becomes more efficient in contexts associated with
more novel task instructions than contexts where most task instructions are repeated. Across two
experiments, we demonstrate that new instructions were implemented better when they were
presented on a task-irrelevant screen location or font color that was predictive of instructions that
were more likely to be novel. Together, these findings suggest that the implementation of new task
instructions is a process that can be called upon by the context, possibly providing a self-regulating
mechanism for cognitive control processes like instruction implementation.

Introspection about RTs in cued task switching
Daniel Bratzke & Donna Bryce

Universität Tübingen, Fachbereich Psychologie
daniel.bratzke@uni-tuebingen.de

The present study explored introspection about one’s own RT performance in cued task switching. In
two experiments, we independently varied the response-cue interval (RCI) and the cue-target interval
(CTI). Each experimental trial consisted of a sequence of two tasks (non-switch or switch), and at the
end of the trial participants provided introspective estimates of their response times for the two tasks
(IRT1 and IRT2) on visual analogue scales. In Experiment 2, participants additionally provided
estimates of the RCI and the CTI for the second task. In Experiment 1, both lengthening the RCI and
lengthening the CTI resulted in a reduction of objective switch costs in RT. Subjectively, however,
only lengthening of the RCI reduced switch costs. In Experiment 2, only lengthening the CTI reduced
the switch costs in objective RTs, and this pattern was rather accurately reflected in IRTs. However,
participants indicated longer IRTs for the longer RCI even though there was no such effect in
objective RTs. The present results confirm our previous finding that participants are aware of their
switch costs, and suggest that timing of the preparatory intervals (CTI and RCI) can alter objective
task switching performance as well as its subjective experience.

38

Contributions

Sensorimotor learning and decision-making in uncertain environments
Daniel Braun

Institute of Neural Information Processing, Ulm University
daniel.braun@uni-ulm.de

Recent advances in movement neuroscience suggest that sensorimotor control can be considered as
a continuous decision-making process in complex environments in which uncertainty and task
variability play a key role. Leading theories of motor control assume that the motor system learns
probabilistic models and that motor behavior can be explained as the optimization of payoff or cost
criteria under the expectation of these models. Here we discuss how the motor system exploits task
variability to build up efficient models through structural learning and compare human behavior to
Bayes optimal models. In particular, we focus on deviations from these normative models due to
effects of model uncertainty and we discuss in how far model uncertainty can be considered as a
special case of a general decision-making framework that considers limited information-processing
capabilities.

Studie zu Warnwirkung und Akzeptanz von haptischem Feedback am
Gaspedal im Kontext von Fahrerassistenzsystemen
Martin Brockmann1 & Pia Weber2

Allround Team GmbH Automotive HMI Development; 2Allround Team GmbH, Automotive HMI Development
martin.brockmann@allround-team.com
1

Aus der Literatur ist bekannt, dass über den haptischen Sinneskanal übermittelte Informationen
Reaktionszeiten und Fahrleistungen signifikant verbessern können. Daher könnte auch die
Anwendung des haptischen Feedbacks am Gaspedal im Kontext von Fahrerassistenzsystemen
vielversprechende Resultate liefern. In dieser Studie wurde die Warnwirkung einer haptischen
Pedalrückmeldung auf das Fahrerverhalten in kritischen Fahrsituationen untersucht. In einem
statischen Simulator der Ford Werke Köln durchfuhren insgesamt N=53 Versuchspersonen ein Curve
Speed Warning (CSW) Szenario sowie verschiedene alternative Warnszenarien. Dabei wurde
Fehlerrate, Bremsreaktionszeit, Kritikalität und Nutzerakzeptanz gemessen. In Experiment 1 (N=29)
wurde die Art des haptischen Pedal-Feedbacks, Vibration, Counterforce oder Double-Tick, variiert.
Ergebnis: Die Double-Tick Variante schloss bei der Fahrerreaktion deutlich schlechter ab. Hinsichtlich
Akzeptanz wurde Counterforce und Double-Tick positiver bewertet als Vibration. Allerdings ist die
Präferenz abhängig vom Warnszenario: Für die Alternativ-Szenarien Forward Collision Warning
und Speed Limit Warning wurden jeweils unterschiedliche Arten des haptischen Feedbacks
favorisiert. Bezüglich der Kritikalität haptischer Pedal-Feedbacks konnte gezeigt werden, dass die
überraschende Auslösung einer Fehlwarnung als weitgehend unkritisch für die Kontrollierbarkeit der
Fahrsituation eingestuft wird. In Experiment 2 (N=24) wurde haptische Pedalrückmeldung mit visuellakustischer Rückmeldung kombiniert. Es zeigte sich, dass das Hinzufügen visueller und akustischer
Stimuli die Gesamtbremsreaktionszeit signifikant verringerte. Die Art des Haptik-Signals machte
hierbei keinen Unterschied.

39

Contributions

Integration of multiple intrinsic and extrinsic cues in metamemory
judgments
Arndt Bröder, Monika Undorf & Anke Söllner
University of Mannheim, School of Social Sciences
broeder@uni-mannheim.de

Metacognition (cognition about cognition) is an important faculty of the human mind enabling the
monitoring and regulation of cognitive activities. The metacognition researcher's workhorse are
people's judgements about their cognitive processes and functions, for example judgements of
learning (JOLs). Here, people judge the probability with which they will later be able to retrieve an
item in a memory test. JOLs are probably inferences based on diverse metacognitive cues, but
typical experiments vary only one cue at a time. This opens the door for serious demand effects, and
leaves open the question whether people are able to integrate several cues varying simultaneously.
In four experiments varying both intrinsic (word properties) and extrinsic (studying circumstances)
cues simultaneously, we explored people's ability to integrate cue information in metacognitive
judgements, demonstrating a remarkable ability of cue integration in metamemory judgments.

Predictability as a task-specific performance enhancer in multitasking
Laura Broeker

German Sport University Cologne, Institute of Psychology - Department of Performance Psychology
l.broeker@dshs-koeln.de

Research suggests a beneficial impact of predictability on dual-task cost reduction, e.g. through
perceptual cues or anticipation. We conducted five experiments in which we applied a continuous
tracking paradigm together with a discrete auditory reaction-time task and manipulated predictability
in the first, the second, or both tasks. In the first two experiments, participants received advance
visual information about the tracking path, enabling them to predict the target’s path; in the third and
fourth experiments, sounds were structured according to a predefined sequence, enabling
participants to predict the onset of target sounds; and in the fifth experiment, sounds were located
250 ms before the inflection point of the tracking curve, enabling participants to use sounds as
warning signals for tracking activity and to integrate the two tasks into one meaningful, covarying
task. Results suggest that predictability operates as a task-specific performance enhancer in dual
tasks, in that visual predictability predominantly aided tracking, auditory predictability predominantly
aided reaction times, and only task-integration manipulations improved performance in both tasks.
We suggest that one-sided information may either be insufficient to free enough resources to cope
with dual-task requirements or may fool participants into believing the perceptual information
emphasizes the importance of the task.

40

Contributions

Modes of task processing: Converging evidence of an individual
preference in free concurrent multitasking across different tasks,
instructions, and time structures
Jovita Brüning, Jessika Reissland & Dietrich Manzey

Technische Universität Berlin, Department of Psychology and Ergonomics
jovita.bruening@tu-berlin.de

In free concurrent multitasking, processing of two tasks can be addressed on a behavioral level of
response organization or on a level of internal task processing mechanisms. This presentation
focusses on the modes of task processing. Reissland & Manzey (2016) and Brüning & Manzey
(2017) proposed an approach to examine the individual mode of task processing classifying their
participants as serial or overlapping processors. We now present converging evidence from six
studies using different tasks (simple verbal letter/digit classifications, spatial mental rotation/pattern
matching tasks, memory tasks, and calculation tasks), different instructions (neutral or emphasizing
overlapping processing), and different time structures (similar/different baseline reaction times,
different response-stimulus intervals). The preferred mode of task processing was identified based on
a fine-grained analysis of the time structure of the responses for most participants. The reported
studies show that overlapping processors can at least partially compensate for switch costs and some
are even more efficient when multitasking than monotasking. This emphasizes the relevance of the
preferred mode of task processing when describing human behavior in multitasking. However, the
proportion of serial and overlapping processors varied between the studies with different
characteristics showing that the processing mode does not purely depend on the individual
preference.

TVA-based assessment of visual processing capacity in patients with
idiopathic REM sleep behaviour disorder
Peter Bublak

Jena University Hospital, Hans Berger Department of Neurology
peter.bublak@med.uni-jena.de

Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep Behaviour Disorder (RBD) is characterized by loss of REM sleep
muscle atonia and dream enacting behavior. It is assumed to reflect early involvement of REM-sleep
regulating brainstem areas in synuclein-mediated neurodegenerative processes (e.g. Parkinson’s
disease (PD) dementia or dementia with Lewy bodies). According to the neuroanatomical hypothesis
of ascending neurodegeneration in synucleinopathies, rostral brain areas including the cortex would
be affected not until later disease stages. More than 80% of patients with idiopathic RBD (iRBD)
develop major motor symptoms or dementia. Therefore, RBD represents an ideal precursor model to
test this hypothesis by looking for prodromal neuro-cognitive changes, in particular visuo-cognitive
deficits. Impaired visuo-cognitive functions have been identified to be especially pronounced in
synucleinopathies. Thus, in the present study, we investigated whether changes in visual processing
capacity are present in a sample of RBD patients, and related to visuo-cognitive functions like
incomplete object identification. The results obtained are identical to earlier findings in patients with
amnestic MCI and early Alzheimer’s disease, suggesting that posterior cortical neurodegeneration
does already exist in patients with iRBD.

41

Contributions

Judging the mood of the crowd: Attention is focused on happy faces
Alica Bucher & Andreas Voss

Heidelberg University
alica.bucher@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

Previous research on valence biases in face perception revealed inconsistent findings either
proposing angry or happy faces to be detected more efficiently. We argue that the typical
experimental task in this field, the face-in-the-crowd paradigm, lacks ecological validity and leads to
ambiguous results. In the present paper, we introduce the mood-of-the-crowd paradigm, that can
complement existing findings. In the new task, participants have to decide which expression is
shown by most faces in a crowd. In Experiment 1, photographs were used as stimuli, whereas
computer-generated faces were presented in Experiments 2 and 3. While in the Experiments 1 and 2
crowds consisted of faces showing either happy and neutral expressions or angry and neutral
expressions, in Experiment 3, crowds were composed of both angry and happy faces. Attentional
processes were assessed with gaze recordings. Across experiments, results indicate that happy faces
are focused with higher probability, and that the predominance of happy faces is assessed more
accurately compared to the predominance of angry faces. Moreover, gender of presented faces was
found to be an important moderator: There was a clear bias to classify female crowds as emotional.
Additionally, the emotionality of female crowds was assessed more accurately.

Testing enhances subsequent learning of spatial information in
younger and older adults
Jonathan Bufe & Alp Aslan

Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Department of Psychology
alp.aslan@psych.uni-halle.de

Prior research has shown that testing can enhance subsequent learning by reducing interference from
the tested information. Here, we investigated this forward effect of testing in younger and older
adults’ memory for spatial information. Participants studied four successively presented 3x3 arrays,
each composed of the same 9 objects. They were asked to memorize the locations of the objects
which differed across the four arrays. Following presentation of each of the first three arrays,
memory for the object locations of the respective array was tested, or the array was re-presented for
additional study. Results revealed that, compared to additional study, immediate testing of the first
three arrays improved location memory on the subsequently studied fourth array, both in younger
and older adults. In addition, immediate testing of the first three arrays also reduced the number of
confusion errors (i.e., assigning an object to a location on which it had been presented previously)
made during recall of the fourth array, again in both age groups. The current results extend previous
findings by indicating that, in both younger and older adults, testing enhances subsequent learning
of spatial information by reducing the build-up of proactive interference from previously studied
information.

42

Contributions

A Meta-Analysis of Contingent-Capture Effects
Christian Büsel, Ulrich Ansorge & Martin Voracek

Universität Wien, Institut für Psychologische Grundlagenforschung und Forschungsmethoden
christian.buesel@univie.ac.at

The present meta-analyses investigated the contingent-capture protocol. The contingent-capture theory
postulates that only top-down matching stimuli capture attention. Evidence for this assumption comes
from the contingent-capture protocol, in which participants search a predefined target stimulus
preceded by a spatial cue. The cue is typically uninformative of the target’s position but either
presented at target position (valid) or away from the target (invalid). The common finding is that
seemingly only top-down matching cues capture attention, as demonstrated by a selective cueing
effect only for cues with a feature similar to the searched-for target. However, the origin of this
“contingent-capture effect” is debated. One explanation is that intertrial priming mediates the
contingent-capture effect. Alternatively, the rapid-disengagement account proposes that all salient
stimuli capture attention initially, but that the disengagement from non-matching cues is rapid. The
present meta-analyses shed light on this debate by (a) identifying moderators of reported contingentcapture effects (60 experiments) and (b) summarizing results of published intertrial priming studies
(12 experiments) in the contingent-capture protocol. We found target-display heterogeneity to be a
reliable moderator, as well as a considerable amount of between-study heterogeneity. Furthermore,
results indicated the presence of publication bias in the published literature.

Eye-movement behavior during object search and scene memorization
with spatial-frequency filtering in central or peripheral vision
Anke Cajar, Ralf Engbert & Jochen Laubrock
University of Potsdam, Department of Psychology
cajar@uni-potsdam.de

When viewing a scene, we move our eyes several times per second to bring objects of interest from
the low-resolution periphery into the high-acuity fovea. The foveal visual field is specialized in
processing fine detail (high spatial frequencies) for object recognition and the peripheral visual field
is specialized in processing coarse information (low spatial frequencies) for saccade target selection.
Here we investigated how this functional segregation affects eye-movement behavior during scene
memorization and object search in color and grayscale scenes. Using eye tracking, high or low
spatial-frequency filters were applied gaze-contingently to central or peripheral vision. Preliminary
results indicate similar eye-movement behavior with memorization and search in color and grayscale
scenes: Viewers avoided filtered scene regions as saccade targets, and fixation durations increased
most with central high-pass and peripheral low-pass filtering. The latter suggests that viewers invested
more processing time when critical spatial frequencies were still available. For both color and
grayscale scenes search was faster and more accurate with central high-pass than low-pass filtering;
peripheral filters had similar effects on search performance. We conclude that object search and
scene memorization are more efficient when critical spatial frequencies for foveal analysis and
peripheral selection are still largely available.

43

Contributions

A SUBJECT ORIENTED STATE-SPACE APPROACH TO MODEL MOUSE
TRACKING-DATA
Antonio Calcagnì1, Luigi Lombardi1, Marco D‘Alessandro1, & Simone Sulpizio2

University of Trento, Department of Psychology and Cognitive Science; 2Vita-Salute S. Raffaele University, Faculty of
Psychology
ant.calcagni@gmail.com

1

Over the last decades, mouse-tracking based experiments are becoming popular and widespread.
Mouse-tracking is a technique to record time-based x-y computer mouse positions during
experimental tasks (e.g., categorization). To analyze mouse-tracking data, several approaches have
been proposed, both from model-free and model based methodologies. In this contribution we
propose a new way to analyze mouse-tracking data within a state-space model perspective.
Particularly, the instantaneous decision positioning of the mouse is modeled as a function of both a
subject-specific response model and a trial-specific complexity model. The overall model is then
estimated simultaneously using a tailor-made Metropolis Hastings algorithm. Real data from lexical
decision tasks are finally used to show the potentials of the proposed method.

Directly Comparing the Effects of Reward Prospect and Reward
Reception on Conflict Adaptation
Rebecca Calcott & Gesine Dreisbach
University of Regensburg, Psychology
rdcalcott@gmail.com

Conflict adaptation occurs via top-down processes as well as simple learned associations, and is
altered by performance-contingent rewards. Prior work has manipulated either reward prospect or
reward reception; however they have never been directly contrasted, thus it is unclear which aspects
of conflict adaptation are modulated by reward prospect and reception respectively. The goal of this
exploratory study is to explicitly test the distinction between reward prospect and reception, by
determining their effects on top-down versus association-based conflict adaptation. Participants
(Target N=105) complete a rewarded Simon Task. In the Prospect condition, participants are
informed about the opportunity to earn a reward prior to each trial, but receive no post-trial
feedback. In the Reception condition, participants receive no information prior to the trial, but
receive feedback after each rewarded trial. Participants’ use of a pre-cue indicating proportion
congruence indicates the strength of top-down processes, while their reactive adaptation to the
previous trial (congruency sequence effect) indicates association-based processes. Results will
delineate the aspects of reward that modulate different mechanisms of conflict adaptation, aid in
interpreting prior research, and have important implications for the design of future experiments
involving performance-contingent rewards.

44

Contributions

Auditory contributions to visual anticipation in tennis
Rouwen Cañal-Bruland1, Florian Müller1, Björn Lach1 & Charles Spence2

Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Department of Sport Psychology; 2University of Oxford, Department of
Experimental Psychology
rouwen.canal.bruland@uni-jena.de

1

Due to the time constraints, in sports such as tennis visual information pick-up is key to successful
anticipation. Yet, the contribution of auditory cues to anticipatory judgements in such situations has
received little attention thus far. In the current study, we scrutinized whether the sound of a tennis ball
being struck by a racquet would modulate anticipatory judgments of its trajectory. Tennis players
were invited to watch videos of tennis rallies from the semi-final of the Australian Open 2016
between Djokovic and Federer, and to predict where the ball would land in the opponent’s half. The
loudness of the sounds emanating from the racquet at ball contact were systematically manipulated.
The results showed that the louder the sound of the contact between the racquet and ball, the longer
participants estimated the ball’s trajectory to be. Our findings suggest that besides the contribution of
vision to anticipation, action-related auditory cues seem to influence anticipatory judgements of the
outcome of strokes in tennis as well.

Role of the cerebellum in adaptation to delayed action effects
Liyu Cao

University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology
liyu.cao@uni-wuerzburg.de

Predicting the timing of self-generated stimuli is important for efficient information processing. Selfgenerated stimuli elicit smaller neural responses as compared to the same stimuli that are externally
generated, which is known as sensory attenuation effect. People get adapted to delayed stimuli
resulting from self-action by showing an increased sensory attenuation effect, which indicates an
update of timing prediction for self-generated stimuli. Both theoretical and empirical studies assert
that the cerebellum is important for predicting self-generated stimuli and for the prediction updating.
In this TMS-MEG study, we tested the role of the cerebellum in updating the timing prediction for selfgenerated stimuli by introducing a 100 ms delay between a keypress and tone presentation. We
showed that participants get adapted to delayed action-effects by showing an increased sensory
attenuation effect (M100 component) within 300 trials. However, this increase in sensory attenuation
disappeared after a 15-minute right cerebellar stimulation using an inhibitory 1 Hz repetitive
stimulation protocol. There was an amplitude change for evoked components in a late time window
(M200 component) after cerebellar stimulation, which we interpreted as a result of changes in the
neural information routing in the brain hierarchy following the cerebellar stimulation.

45

Contributions

Number of users as a heuristic for making decision: advice-taking in
social media
Guillermo Carbonell1, Matthias Brand1 & Dar Meshi2

University of Duisburg-Essen, General Psychology: Cognition; 2Michigan State University, Social and Media
Neuroscience Lab
guillermo.carbonell@uni-due.de
1

Physician rating websites allow users to check physicians’ profiles, rate their performance, and find
a suitable physician for visiting. The recommendation of other users might influence the decision of
which physician to visit. In order to investigate this, we used a Judge-Advisor System where 130
participants (91 women, 38 men, age: M= 25.72, SD= 9.79 years) reported the likelihood to visit a
physician at two different times: before and after seeing the recommendation of others. Three
conditions were presented: high and low number of users recommending a physician, and no
recommendations. We also assessed decision-making under objective risk conditions, executive
functions, and personality. We found that participants were more confident and also adapted their
second estimate closer to the recommendation when a high number of users were rating the
physician. We are able to find analogies between advice-taking as classically studied in cognitive
psychology and user-behavior on the internet. A high number of users rating might be a heuristic that
influences the decision, similar to the role of expertise which has been shown in other studies. Future
studies should investigate the neural correlates of following recommendations, which can be
compared to advice-taking.

Eye movement patterns in reading texts with unusual typography
Johan Chandra, André Krügel & Ralf Engbert

Universität Potsdam, Experimental & Biological Psychology
jochandr@uni-potsdam.de

The interplay between cognitive and oculomotor processes in word selection and saccade
generation can be explored when the spatial information of text deviates from the normal display of
text. While cognitive aspect of eye guidance (fixation durations, fixation probabilities) are highly
adaptive, the properties of the oculomotor system turned out to be rather stable. We trained readers
in reading manipulated texts and investigated various eye-movement measures during reading of text
with manipulated typographic display compared to normal text: Word-wise and letter-wise mirrorreversed, inverted, and scrambled conditions. As expected, longer fixation times, shorter saccades
lengths, less word skippings and more refixations and regressions were observed in reading
manipulated text compared to reading normal text. However, we also found adaptivity of the
oculomotor system. While reading text with inverted writing direction reduced the launch-site effect,
reading manipulated text with typical writing direction increased the launch-site effect. In two-fixation
cases, we could also find evidence for shifts in mean landing positions towards the most informative
part of the text strings. These results support the view that oculomotor system is adaptive when
confronted with unusual reading conditions.

46

Contributions

Observation of the whole-body movement sequences: Memory
encoding, retention, and retrieval of the movement-related spatial
and temporal information
Shiau-Chuen Chiou & Thomas Schack

Bielefeld University, Neurocognition and Action Research Group, Center of Excellence Cognitive Interaction
Technology (CITEC)
shiau-chuen.chiou@uni-bielefeld.de

What kind of information do we perceive and retain during action observation? In this study, we
aimed for understanding how well the spatial (trajectory) and the temporal (rhythm) information of
whole-body movement sequences can be encoded, retained, and retrieved from the short-term
memory. Participants (n = 28) watched two sequentially displayed movement clips (6 s each) with an
ISI of 0.5 s or 3 s and then made a same-different judgment. Movement sequences, all without action
semantics, were different in either spatial and/or temporal domain. The results showed that the
change of the temporal information was less detectable than that of the spatial information as
measured by perceptual sensitivity (d’), indicating a weaker memory trace on temporal information.
Surprisingly, no significant difference was found between the short and the long ISIs. Two possible
explanations would be: First, there is an encoding rather than a retention problem; or second, the
encoding process may be intact, but the memory trace of the temporal information has already
decayed during the display of the first video, and the preserved information, which is likely to be the
abstracted information of a movement, retained longer than 3 s in the memory system.

Prioritization across distributed neural stores for visual working
memory
Thomas B. Christophel, Polina Iamshchinina, Chang Yan, Carsten Allefeld & John-Dylan Haynes
BCCN Berlin
tbchristophel@gmail.com

Visual working memories are represented by a widespread network of neural stores, ranging from
detailed representations in visual cortices to robust and invariant storage in prefrontal cortices. It is
unclear, however, what principles govern whether a given area is recruited for working memory
storage. Here, we show that attentional prioritization can govern what areas represent individual
working memory items. In a two-stage change discrimination task, participants memorized the
orientation of two gratings in each trial. A first cue indicated that one of them (the attended item)
should be used for a first orientation-change-discrimination task after a delay. Then, a second cue
could select either the same or the other, previously unattended item for a second task. Such a twostage task forces participants to maintain the orientations of both gratings until the presentation of
second cue, but directs attention to the cued item. We used fMRI and multivariate pattern analyses
(cvMANOVA MVPA) to examine the distinctness of brain activity patterns evoked by working
memory storage. Anterior regions (IPS and FEF) carried information about both attended and
unattended items. Visual areas (V1-V4), however, selectively carried information about attended
items, demonstrating that attentional prioritization can govern the localization of working memory
storage.

47

Contributions

The "distraction potential” of environment sounds during closed-loop
visuomotor control
Lewis Chuang & Menja Scheer

Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
lewis.chuang@tuebingen.mpg.de

Sounds in our environment can capture our interest even if they bear no relevance to our ongoing
occupation. In the context of driving, this could be a crying child in the backseat. Even if we do not
exhibit any behavioral responses, our brains generate a characteristic ERP waveform to such sounds;
this has been termed the distraction potential (Escera & Corral, 2003). We have found that general
steering demands attenuate the amplitudes of the early and late novelty P3 components of this
distraction potential (Scheer, Bülthoff, Chuang, 2016). In particular, varying the complexity of a
steering task’s control dynamics selectively attenuates the late novelty P3 component of the
distraction potential, whilst having no effect on the early novelty P3. Other manipulations of steering
difficulty, such as control disturbances, do not have a similar impact. These findings mirror those
found in dual-task paradigms whereby similar conflicts were found with the P300 potentials
generated by infrequent task-relevant tones (e.g., Wickens et al., 1983). Thus, we propose that the
late novelty P3 component generated by complex and task-irrelevant sounds is comparable to the
better established P300 potentials. Both components might reflect the availability of cross-modal
executive working memory resources.

The effect of perceptual set in airport security
Anna Conci

FernUniversität in Hagen
anna.conci@fernuni-hagen.de

Visual search is of great importance in some jobs, such as luggage screening at airports. To
guarantee a safe flight, the screening operator needs to notice dangerous objects (targets) in
luggage. Previous studies have found that one of the biggest problems in visual search is the
phenomenon of subsequent search misses (SSM): people often cannot find a second target when
they have already found one. One explanation for missing the second target is the perceptual set
hypothesis. It predicts that when a target has been found, people are more likely to find a second
target when it is similar to the first one. SSM frequently occurs in the standard laboratory visual
search with multiple targets. We tested it using x-ray images of hand packages. Participants either
had to keep the target or a different figure in working memory while searching the display. With the
target in working memory, search times were lower and accuracy was higher. Therefore, we can
assume that visual search performance is depending on the perceptual set.

48

Contributions

Task demands bias structural representations in visual working
memory: Global- and local-level hierarchical object benefits
Markus Conci, Heinrich René Liesefeld, Hermann J. Müller & Qi-Yang Nie
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Department Psychologie
conci@psy.lmu.de

Natural scenes consist of multiple hierarchical levels, though typically more global levels are
prioritized over more local levels. A global-object benefit has also been revealed in visual working
memory (vWM), which illustrates that mnemonic representations of global objects are prioritized
over corresponding local object levels (Nie, Müller & Conci, 2017). This finding supports a
hierarchical organization of items in vWM, but it is unknown whether such structured representations
can be adapted flexibly according to task demands. To test the flexibility of object structure in vWM,
we performed two experiments that presented to-be-remembered hierarchical configurations with
global and local orientation information in change-detection (Experiment 1) and continuous-report
(Experiment 2) tasks while systematically varying the amount of required memory precision. Our
results revealed a consistent influence of precision demands on the structure of memory: the typical
global-object benefit was reduced and eventually reversed into a local-object benefit with the degree
to which object details were to be remembered. These findings indicate that structured memory
representations are flexibly adjusted according to task demands, thus challenging accounts that
assume fixed representations in vWM.

Explicit and implicit modality switching in a naming task
Carla Contreras Saavedra, Andrea Philipp & Iring Koch

RWTH Aachen University, Department of Cognitive and Experimental Psychology
carla.contreras@rwth-aachen.de

This research explores the interplay of explicit and implicit modality switching to learn more about
potential influences on embodied language processing. The task is to name objects vocally. As
regards explicit sensory modalities, the objects are either visually presented as pictures or auditorily
presented as sound files. The objects differ with respect to their implicit sensory modality by being
either audition-related (e.g., radio) or vision-related (e.g. camera). Both, the explicit and the implicit
sensory modality vary in an unpredictable sequence. This enables us to analyze explicit modality
switching and implicit modality switching as well as the influence of modality congruence (congruent
= visual stimuli presented visually vs. incongruent = auditory stimuli presented visually). Preliminary
results indicate a substantial switch cost with respect to explicit sensory modalities and a trend for
implicit modality switch costs. This data pattern, however, is much stronger in incongruent trials than
congruent trials. These findings indicate that the meaning of a word (i.e., the implicit sensory
modality) plays a role in a naming task and interacts with the explicitly presented sensory modality.
Also, demonstrate the primacy of explicit sensory modalities in language processing that might mask
effects of embodied language processing.

49

Contributions

Movement Primitives and Flexible Control in Virtual Reality
Annabell Coors, Benjamin Knopp & Dominik Endres
Philipps-Universität, AE theoretical neuroscience
Coorsa@students.uni-marburg.de

Research questions: Regularities in human movements are obvious, despite a large number of
degrees of freedom in human bodies[1]. This led to the idea that the CNS generates movements by
combining a small number of discrete elements, movement primitives (MPs)[2]. We tested which MP
model describes corrective hand movements best. Besides, we examined whether the timing of a
perturbation influences the motor control strategy. Furthermore, we evaluated the effect of time
pressure on human movements and the suitability of virtual reality (VR) as a research method.
Method: 30 participants performed a shelf-stacking task in VR while being full-body motion-captured.
In half of the trials differently timed perturbations occurred that made corrective movements
necessary. Results: The spatiotemporal model (5-8 MPs) accounts best for corrective hand
movements. Average trajectories and timing provide strong evidence that open-loop control is used
to correct for late perturbations while closed-loop control is employed in the case of early ones. Time
pressure did not affect the success rate, but affected the mean velocity and the task evaluation. VR
allows for high ecological validity and experimental control. References: [1] Bizzi, E. et al. (2008).
Brain Research Reviews, 57(1). [2] Franklin, D.W. & Wolpert, D.M. (2011). Neuron, 72(3).

Psychopathic Meanness Predicts the Positive Expression, not the
Acquisition, of Evaluative Responses in the Evaluative conditioning
Paradigm
Olivier Corneille1, Adrien Mierop1, Catia Teixeira2 & Pedro Almeida3
Catholic University Louvain; 2University of Groningen; 3University of Porto
olivier.corneille@uclouvain.be

1

EC research has mainly focused on procedural conditions under which the pairing of stimuli results in
the formation of evaluative responses. In contrast, the role of individual differences in EC has been
largely neglected (e.g., De Houwer, 2009). This lack of interest is surprising, considering that
individual differences have long been known to play a critical role in attitude formation (e.g., Brino~l
& Petty, 2005). The present research examined the role of psychopathic traits in Evaluative
Conditioning (EC) effects. Overall, evidence suggests that Psychopathy Meanness reduces the
expression, rather than the acquisition, of evaluative responses in the EC paradigm, and that this
effect is limited to the expression of positive responses for non-human stimuli. Mediating accounts in
terms of reduced CS-US contingency awareness or lower sensitivity to US valence among higher
meanness scorers are not supported by the data.

50

Contributions

The acquisition of labels for auditory objects: An ERP study
Samuel H Cosper1, Claudia Männel2 & Jutta L Mueller1

Osnabrück University, Institute of Cognitive Science; 2Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences;
University Leipzig, Medical Faculty
samuel.cosper@uos.de

1

How infants learn words and acquire semantic meaning is the subject of philosophical debate and
empirical study. Most studies investigating meaning acquisition choose a bimodal setup with spoken
pseudowords to be associated as labels with visually presented images. In order to more fully
understand the phenomenon of word learning, it is vital to explore modalities of objects beyond that
of the visual – more specifically, the auditory. The current ERP study in 10- to 12-month-old infants
used an association learning paradigm where novel auditory stimuli, namely environmental sounds,
were paired with spoken pseudowords in either a constant or a random manner. In a subsequent
testing phase, matching and non-matching auditory object-word combinations were presented. ERPs
will be reported in relation to learning-related changes over time and to the processing of
familiarized vs. non-familiarized pairings. The findings add insight to the current understanding of
modality-specific constraints and processes during word learning in different stages of life.
Moreover, further studies in this direction will additionally contribute to the debate between modalityspecific and amodal semantic representations.

Switching between two modalities under fatigue
Árpád Csathó1, András Matuz1, Orsolya Simon1 & István Hernádi2

University of Pécs, Institute of Behavioral Sciences; 2University of Pécs, Department of Experimental Neurobiology
arpad.csatho@aok.pte.hu

1

Fatigue is known to have detrimental effect on many cognitive operations including the attentional
alteration between two different tasks. Previously, fatigue sensitivity of task-switching ability has been
examined with unimodal stimuli only. Therefore, this study was addressed to the effect of mental
fatigue induced by Time-on-Task (ToT) on cross-modal attentional switching. We assumed that
switching between modalities demands high attentional cost and so it might be sensitive to fatigue
related decline in attentional capacity. We adapted a cross-modal switching task for ToT paradigm
[Lukas et al, 2014, Acta Psychologica, 153]. Visual and auditory stimuli were presented
simultaneously and participants needed to decide if the stimulus in the cued modality was presented
for a short or a long duration. The experiment had two phases. First, participants (N=20) performed
the temporal judgment task for 1.5 hours without rest (2000 trials in total). Subjective fatigue,
reaction time, error rates, blink rates, and electrocardiogram were recorded. Second, participants
had a resting period (15 minutes) followed by an additional block of trials. Results yielded a nonmodality specific increment in switching cost as a function of ToT. Performance was significantly
improved by resting. In addition, heart rate variability was found to show ToT related changes.

51

Contributions

Age differences in the flexible use of cognitive control: ERP and
behavioral evidence for life-span differences in reactive and proactive
control
Daniela Czernochowski

University of Kaiserslautern, Center for Cognitive Science
czernochowski@sowi.uni-kl.de

In many situations, a rapid selection between conflicting response alternatives is necessary. The Dual
Mechanisms of Control framework (Braver, 2012) posits that correct response selection can be
based on either proactive or reactive control. I will present a series of experiments in which various
levels of response conflict were induced. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded to identify
dissociable neural correlates for both control processes in young and older adults as well as
children. Young adults were able to flexibly adjust their response criteria according to changing task
demands, as evident in efficient task preparation and the selective use of reactive control for the most
demanding task conditions. Conversely, older adults showed difficulties in task preparation and
higher overall response conflict, but selected the correct responses at the expense of long RTs by
relying on reactive control processes regardless of task demands. Hence, older adults appear unable
to adjust to the current task demands. Finally, ERPs suggest that conflict detection is functionally
mature even in young children. However, increased conflict did not lead to increased cognitive
control on the subsequent trial for children, as younger children in particular were unable to translate
conflict into correct response selection despite long RTs.

Proactive Item Distortions in Visual Working Memory
Stefan Czoschke1, Benjamin Rahm2, Benjamin Peters1, Jochen Kaiser1 & Christoph Bledowski1

Goethe University, Institute of Medical Psychology; 2Albert-Ludwigs-University, Medical Psychology and Medical
Sociology
stefan.czoschke@gmail.com

1

While current models of working memory assume that mnemonic representations are stored
independently of one another, recent studies have observed systematic inter-item interactions in
sensory working memory tasks. However, both the processing stage and the circumstances under
which these interactions occur have yet to be investigated systematically. In a series of experiments,
we found that proactive interactions depend on the spatio-temporal characteristics of item
presentation. We presented two random-dot patterns sequentially at the same or different retinal
positions under varying inter-stimulus intervals (ISI) and measured systematic response biases induced
by their directional relations. Items presented at different retinal positions showed a proactive
repulsion effect for very brief ISIs that disappeared at temporal separations of 500 ms. In contrast,
when items were presented at the same retinal position, proactive repulsions occurred even for ISIs
of 2s. A direct perceptual comparison task revealed that these interactions were not purely
perceptual but increased in the post-encoding phase. In summary, our results suggest that proactive
distortion effects appear under conditions that put great demands on interference protection (high
temporal or spatial proximity of concurrent stimuli) and rely partly on interactions on the memory
level.

52

Contributions

Sudden, but not incremental insights lead to Aha! experiences
Amory H. Danek, Joshua Williams & Jennifer Wiley

Universität Heidelberg, Allgemeine und Theoretische Psychologie
amory.danek@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

Suddenness in the emergence of solution due to changes in problem representation, and the
subjective Aha! experience are thought to be the two main features of insightful problem solving.
However, little work has demonstrated a connection among these cognitive and affective solution
features. We used importance-to-solution ratings as a way to track participants’ problem solving
process and hypothesized that solutions exhibiting sudden-change patterns (“insight-like” solutions)
would be more likely to be connected to self-reported Aha! experiences than those with incrementalchange patterns. Participants viewed a set of magic trick videos with the task of finding out how
each trick worked, and rated six action verbs for each trick (including one that implied the correct
solution) multiple times during solution. They were also asked to indicate the extent to which they
experienced an Aha! moment. Within correct solutions, sudden-change patterns led to higher Aha!
ratings than incremental-change patterns. The results show a connection between sudden changes in
problem representations (leading to correct solutions) and the subjective appraisal of solutions as an
Aha! experience. This offers the first empirical support for a close relationship between two
theoretical constructs that have traditionally been assumed to be related to insightful problem solving.

COGNITION AND INHIBITORY PROCESSES IN INTERNET ADDICTION:
STROOP-RELATED FMRI STUDY
Gergely Darnai, Beatrix Lábadi, András Norbert Zsidó, Orsolya Inhóf, Gergely Orsi, Gabor Perlaki,
Szilvia Nagy & Jozsef Janszky
University of Pecs, Department of General and Evolutionary Psychology
darnai.gergely@pte.hu

Previous studies showed that impaired brain activity in the default mode network (DMN) and
attentional control network (ACN) are strongly related to addictions. It explains several attached
symptoms, including cognitive control deficits and impaired attention. Although internet addiction
(IA) is becoming an important mental health issue, the DMN and ACN-related studies are sparse.
Sixty young right handed subjects were included from which 30 were considered as internet addicts
based on PIUQ and 30 were considered as normal users. Task-related activations and deactivations
were assessed using event-related fMRI design in a verbal STROOP task and non-verbal SIMON
task. Based on previous studies incongruent stimuli and the contrast between incongruent and
congruent stimuli were analyzed. Activations in DMN-related structures were negatively correlated
with PIUQ scores during the incongruent stimuli, whilst activations in ACN-related structures were
significantly related to PIUQ subscores in incongruent-congruent contrast. According to our result
similarly to other addiction forms problematic internet use is also related to DMN and ACN activity
and these relationships have several clinical significances. First, we suggest that IA is a substantive
psychiatric condition. Secondly, despite of several brain-related similarities between IA and
substance addictions IA might lead to specific cognitive and behavioral effects.

53

Contributions

banto - a free participant recruitment and booking system
Stephan de la Rosa

Department of Perception, Cognition and Action, Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
delarosa@tuebingen.mpg.de

Many psychological experiments require human participants for which researchers often need to
share the same equipment (computers, fMRI scanners, etc.). As a result recruitment of participants is
a time consuming task that requires coordination between researchers. Here we present a new free
online tool for participant recruitment called Banto that manages participant recruitment and
equipment booking. Banto was partially developed with the help of the Department of Perception,
Cognition and Action at the Max Planck Institute of Biological Cybernetics, Tübingen, Germany.
Banto works like an online posting board: experimenters post their experiments and participants sign
up for them. Once a participant signs up for an experiment appointment, all equipment that
experimenters specified as necessary for the experiment (e.g. computers, rooms) is automatically
booked along. While Banto is free to use we ask users to support the project by claiming some
overhead costs for participant recruitment in future grant applications.

A sensorimotor prior for succesful reaches
Nienke B Debats1 & Herbert Heuer2

Bielefeld University, Cognitive Neurosciences & CITEC; 2Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and
Human Factors
nienke.debats@uni-bielefeld.de

1

In our previous work on multisensory integration, we coincidentally observed somewhat puzzling
biases in a goal-directed reaching task: participants’ judgments of their final hand positions
appeared to be biased towards the intended final positions. We here report a single study that
reveals an intriguing origin of these biases. In the experiment, participants made reaching
movements with their right hand on a trackpad (no visual feedback). A visual target was shown
briefly before movement onset. Participants judged either the remembered target or final hand
position. We found mutual biases that were so strong that the judged target and hand positions were
essentially identical. The biased judgments’ characteristics were consistent with optimal integration
model predictions, showing that humans integrate the sensed and intended final position in
reaching, thereby losing access to the independent estimates. The occurrence of sensory integration
depends on common-cause assessments that are based on online sensory evidence and prior
assumptions. As sensory causality evidence is lacking in our task, the integration of actual and
intended reach positions must be purely based on prior assumptions about the redundancy of target
and hand position information. This implies that humans have a strong prior for successfully reaching
their intended goal position.

54

Contributions

Influence of ID speech and singing on 12-month-olds’ social
preferences
Franziska Degé1, Sandra Trehub2 & Gudrun Schwarzer1

Justus-Liebig-University, Developmental Psychology; 2University of Toronto Mississauga
franziska.dege@psychol.uni-giessen.de
1

Infants exhibit social preferences for unfamiliar adults who speak a familiar rather than unfamiliar
language (Kinzler et al., 2007). We evaluate the possibility of social preferences for unfamiliar
women who engage in ID speech or singing involving a familiar language (German) and vocal
register (ID). We used the Kinzler et al. (2007) social-choice task to ascertain whether 12-month-olds
exhibit more affiliative tendencies toward a woman who sings than to one who speaks. In four trials,
23 (13 male) 12-month-olds (mean age: M = 12.58 months, SD = 0.26) watched successive videos
(counterbalanced order) in which one unfamiliar woman spoke and another sang in ID manner.
Afterwards, speaker and singer silently introduced identical toys on side-by-side videos (side of
singer and speaker counterbalanced), then offered the toys to infants, at which point real versions of
the toys appeared. Infants’ choice was recorded. A repeated measures ANOVA revealed that
infants’ toy choices favored the singer (M = 2.25, SD = 1.07) over the speaker (M = 1.4, SD = .88),
F(1,19) = 4.39, p = .05, eta² = 0.19. In short, ID singing promoted affiliative tendencies in 12month-olds, as reflected in the greater incidence of taking toys from singers than from speakers.

Neural Correlates of Face Perception in an Inattentional Blindness
Paradigm: A Simultaneous EEG-fMRI study
Torge Dellert, Miriam Müller-Bardorff, Maximilian Bruchmann & Thomas Straube

Institute of Medical Psychology and Systems Neuroscience, University of Münster
torge.dellert@uni-muenster.de

Recent advances in the search for the neural correlates of consciousness (NCC) have emphasized
the role of temporo-occipital visual brain areas, while fronto-parietal areas seem to be recruited by
task-related processes following stimulus awareness. The present simultaneous EEG-fMRI study aimed
at dissociating the neural correlates of stimulus awareness and task-related processing with the help
of a three-phase, no-report inattentional-blindness paradigm based on Shafto & Pitts (2015). In
phase 1, more than 70 healthy subjects performed a demanding distractor task while line drawings
of faces and control stimuli were presented centrally. One third of the subjects reported inattentional
blindness to the faces in phase 1. In phase 2, subjects performed the same distractor task, but all
participants were informed about the task-irrelevant faces. In phase 3, faces became task-relevant.
Our EEG results largely replicated the findings of Shafto and Pitts, dissociating the roles of
awareness and task-relevance. In fMRI, activation of ventral visual brain areas differed between
inattentionally blind subjects and spontaneous noticers, indicating a central role of these structures in
conscious face perception. In contrast, task relevance activated different brain areas including frontoparietal regions and the default-mode network. Limitations and implications for contemporary
theories of conscious perception are discussed.

55

Contributions

Eyewitness performance in sequential lineups: A ROC-based analysis
of order effects
Birk Diedenhofen, Sonja Willing & Jochen Musch
University of Düsseldorf
birk.diedenhofen@uni-duesseldorf.de

Previous studies based on the analysis of ROC curves have shown that sequential lineup procedures
do not outperform simultaneous lineups in terms of suspect discriminability. To explore a potential
drawback of sequential lineups, we investigated whether the sequential presentation of suspects is
more susceptible to order effects than a simultaneous presentation if a foil looking similar to the
suspect is present. To this end, we manipulated the order in which the suspect and a similar foil were
presented in an online experiment. When a similar foil was presented after the suspect, there was no
difference in discriminability between the two lineup types. When a similar foil was presented prior
to the suspect, however, we found discriminability to be lower in sequential lineups than in
simultaneous lineups. ROC analyses confirmed that the sequential lineups suffered from unwanted
order effects. Eyewitnesses tended to prematurely pick similar foils and were therefore more likely to
miss the perpetrator in sequential lineups. Based on our ROC analyses, we recommend that contrary
to prior recommendations formulated in research based on misleading diagnosticity ratios,
simultaneous lineups should be preferred over sequential lineups because of their higher
discriminability and robustness against unwanted order effects.

Strategies of perceptual learning and cognitive control during ultrafast speech comprehension – a comparison between blind
with/without residual vision, and sighted
Susanne Dietrich1, Ingo Hertrich2 & Hermann Ackermann2

Universität Tübingen, Fachbereich Psychologie, Evolutionäre Kognition (Kognitionswissenschaft); 2Universität
Tübingen, Neurologie
s.dietrich@uni-tuebingen.de

1

Sprachverständnis bei schnellen Sprechgeschwindigkeiten erfordert präzise sensorische
Diskriminationsleistungen und prädiktive Mechanismen. Blinde können Sprechgeschwindigkeiten von
bis zu 22 Silben/s verstehen lernen, was die Leistung untrainierter Personen (8-12 Silben/s) weit
überschreitet. Bisherige Untersuchungen zeigten, dass bei Blinden primär visuelle Aktivierung (V1)
mit der Fähigkeit, sehr schnelle Sprechraten zu verstehen, korreliert. Im Rahmen einer Trainingsstudie
wird untersucht, ob Blinde beim Erlernen dieser Fähigkeit, V1 involvieren und ob Sehbehinderte mit
Restsehvermögen sowie Sehende sich diese Fähigkeit aneignen können. Alle drei Gruppen sollten
mittels computerbasierter Sprachausgabe über einen Zeitraum von 6 Monaten Sprechraten von 18
Silben/s verstehen lernen. Vor und nach dem Training erfolgten Aufnahmen mittels funktioneller
Magnetresonanztomographie sowie behaviorale Tests zum Sprachverständnis. Nach dem Training
zeigten alle drei Gruppen einen ähnlichen Trainingserfolg. Klassische linkshemisphärische Areale
des Sprachverständnisses waren nach dem Training in allen Gruppen bei schneller Sprechrate
aktiviert. Unterschiedliche Aktivierungsmuster zeigten die Gruppen in rechtem V1 (Blinde), Insula
(Sehende) – eng verbunden mit dem auditorischen Kortex – und postzentralen Gyrus (PoCG,
Sehbehinderte). Alle Gruppen zeigten Aktivität in der supplementär motorischen Area (SMA): preSMA (Blinde, Sehende) und SMA proper (Sehbehinderte). Die Ergebnisse zeigen, dass sowohl
perzeptuelles Lernen (V1, Insula, PoCG) als auch kognitive Kontrollmechanismen (SMA)
unterschiedliche Strategien der drei Gruppen widerspiegeln.

56

Contributions

The influence of affect on flexibility and stability in self-organized
multitasking
David Dignath

University Freiburg
dignath.david@gmail.com

Cognitive control in multitasking requires stable maintenance of task-specific rules to process each
task individually and flexible task switching to schedule the order of tasks appropriately. A factor that
was discussed to influence both, flexibility and stability, is affect. The present research investigated
how phasic affect (valence and arousal) influences flexibility and stability during self-organized
multitasking. We used a procedure that combines features of voluntary task switching with features
of response interference tasks. Results showed that high arousal, irrespective of valence, impaired
flexibility in terms of increased switch costs. Furthermore, task choices imply that transient fluctuations
of task-irrelevant negative affect trigger voluntary task switches away from the negative affect
associated task. No influence of affect in stability was observed. In light of these results, we discuss
whether flexibility and stability might be dissociable attributes of cognitive control. Yet, additional
correlational analyses between measures of flexibility and stability are more in line with a
unidimensional construct.

Joint visual attention and locomotor experience: A longitudinal study
with typically developing infants and infants with locomotor delay
Julia Dillmann, Gloria Gehb, Christian-Dominik Peterlein & Gudrun Schwarzer
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen, Department of Developmental Psychology
Julia.Dillmann@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Several studies have shown that locomotor experiences facilitate the development of joint attention
skills in typically developing infants and in infants with spina bifida (e.g. Campos et al., 1997;
Campos, Anderson, & Telzrow, 2009). Therefore, in the present study we investigated the
development of joint visual attention skills of 11 infants with locomotor delay due to congenital
idiopathic clubfoot (e.g. Garcia et al., 2011) and 14 typically developing infants. All infants were
tested longitudinally at the ages of 6, 9, 12 months and, additionally, 1 to 2 weeks and 5 to 6
weeks after their onset of crawling with a following of point and gaze gesture task (Campos et al.,
1997; 2009). Our results confirmed a delayed onset of crawling in clubfoot infants; however, our
results did not show poorer joint attention performances in those infants. Moreover, our results
demonstrated a positive effect of crawling in typically developing infants at the age of 9 months.
Taken together, our results indicated a more complex interrelation between the development of joint
attention skills and locomotor experiences than expected so far. Further research is needed to gain a
deeper understanding of this link in typically as well as in locomotor delayed infants.

57

Contributions

If it’s hard to understand, try harder! More evidence for processing
adjustments to auditory (dis-) fluency
Thomas Dolk, Claudia Freigang, Johanna Bogon & Gesine Dreisbach
thomas.dolk@psychologie.uni-regensburg.de

An increasing amount of studies indicates that experiencing increased task demands triggered for
example by conflicting stimulus features or low perceptual fluency lead to processing adjustments.
While these demand triggered processing adjustments have been shown for different paradigms
(e.g., response conflict tasks, perceptual disfluency, task switching, dual tasking), most of them are
restricted to the visual modality. By adapting the experimental design of the initial processing-fluencyparadigm by Dreisbach and Fischer (Psychological Research, 75, 376–383 (2011)) to the auditory
modality, the present study investigated as to whether the challenge to understand speech signals
would also lead to processing adjustments. To that end, we used spoken number words (one to nine)
that were either displayed with high (clean speech) or low perceptual fluency (i.e., vocoded speech
as used in cochlear implants – Experiment 1; speech embedded in multi-speaker babble noise as
typically faced at bars – Experiment 2). Participants had to judge the spoken number words as
smaller or larger than five. Results show that the fluency effect (performance difference between high
and low perceptual fluency) in both experiments was smaller following disfluent words. Thus, if it’s
hard to understand, you try harder.

Neural transfer of training in task switching in old age
Sandra Dörrenbächer, Hubert Zimmer & Jutta Kray
Saarland University, Psychology
S.Doerrenbaecher@googlemail.com

Neural transfer of training in cognitive control has been assumed to occur if brain-activation changes
associated with the training and transfer tasks rely on spatially overlapping brain regions. Here, we
aimed at examining whether the amount of transfer also depends on temporal overlap, that is, on
overlapping sustained (block-related) or transient (trial-related) timescales of the involved neural
processes. We assigned a sample of 50 older adults to a task-switching training or an active control
group, and administered two transfer paradigms, either sensitive to capture sustained (a delayedrecognition working-memory task) or transient dynamics of cognitive control (a context-updating
task). These were approached by the appropriate block-related or event-related functional magnetic
resonance imaging design. Neural transfer was defined as selective changes in task activation
during the transfer task after task-switching training compared to the control group. Results indicated
neural transfer (a) to the sustained-sensitive delayed recognition task in regions and timescales
overlapping with the training task (spatio-temporal overlap); and (b) to the transient-sensitive contextupdating task on the same timescale but in different regions than in the training task (only temporal
overlap). These results suggest that task-switching training can foster better temporal organization of
control processing also in other control tasks.

58

Contributions

The end-state comfort effect in joint action
Dominik Dötsch & Anna Schubö

Philipps-Universität Marburg, Department of Psychology
dominik.doetsch@uni-marburg.de

Human agents tend to end their movements in relatively comfortable postures, even when this
requires uncomfortable initial postures. In a series of experiments we investigated whether agents
also anticipate a partner’s end-state comfort in a joint action task. Participants performed a joint pickand-place task in a naturalistic, breakfast-table-like paradigm: they transported a wooden cup from
one end of a table to the other, with one agent moving it to an intermediate position and their
partner transporting it to the goal. Hand and finger movements were recorded via 3D motion
tracking, gaze was recorded with portable eye-tracking glasses. Results showed that the orientation
of the first agent’s grip when they picked up the cup was affected by the required cup orientation at
the goal position. Most agents adapted the rotation of the cup’s handle when they placed it on the
intermediate position to the joint action goal, thereby facilitating the partner’s subsequent movement.
These results suggest that human agents tend to represent a partner’s end-state comfort and integrate
it into their own movement planning in cooperative joint action. However, social factors like group
membership and personality traits modulate this tendency.

Investigating the temporal dynamics of object-scene integration using
MVPA: The role of the N300/N400 complex in object perception
Dejan Draschkow, Edvard Aslak Heikel, Melissa L.-H. Võ, Christian J Fiebach & Jona Sassenhagen
Goethe University Frankfurt
draschkow@psych.uni-frankfurt.de

Typically investigated by violating certain environmental expectations and regularities (e.g., a
toothbrush in the fridge), a late event-related negativity (N400) has been linked to the semantic
processing of language, objects and scenes. Incongruent object-scene relationships are additionally
associated with an earlier negative deflection of the EEG signal between 250-350ms – often referred
to as N300 – and hypothesized to reflect pre-semantic perceptual processes. We used multivariate
pattern analysis (MVPA) to investigate if the early object-scene integration activity (250-350ms)
shares certain levels of processing with late activity (400-600ms). Forty participants were presented
with semantic inconsistencies, in which an object was incongruent with a scene’s meaning. A
standard ERP analysis revealed significant N300 and N400 deflections. MVPA showed above
chance classification of congruent vs. incongruent object-scene relationships during both time
windows. To test if neurocognitive patterns are shared between early and late components, we used
a time-generalized MVPA procedure where a classifier trained at one time point in a trial is tested at
every other time point. We found above chance decoding performance for classifier trained during
time points of the N300 and tested during later time points of the N400. This indicates that context
processing interacts with early perceptual stages of object processing.

59

Contributions

Serial integration of information in active touch
Knut Drewing, Alexandra Lezkan & Anna Metzger
Giessen University, Department of Psychology
knut.drewing@psychol.uni-giessen.de

In active touch people often explore objects over extended time periods, using movements that
consist of repetitive segments (e.g. repeated indentations or strokes). Repeating the same movement
yields redundant information. While the integration of redundant information that is simultaneously
available has been well described by models of optimal integration, mechanisms underlying serial
integration are less clear. In several experiments, we investigated serial integration in haptic
perception. Participants explored two stimuli in a sequence, with varying numbers of repetitive
movement segments, and discriminated among them according to texture or softness. We
manipulated texture or softness estimates derived from single movement segments of the multisegmented movements to assess their contributions to the perceptual task. In the exploration of the
first stimulus contributions of different estimates were similar, but for the second stimulus estimates
associated with later as compared to earlier movement segments contributed less. In line with
unequal contribution, perceptual variance decreased with an increasing number of movement
segments less than expected for optimal integration. The pattern of results is well explained by
assuming that the representation of the first stimulus fades when the second stimulus is explored. We
model the results by a Kalman filter that considers memory decay.

Confidence Judgements and Decentering in Patients with Major
Depression
Barbara Drueke

University Hospital of the RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Medical Psychology and Medical Sociology
bdrueke@ukaachen.de

Research: Patients suffering from major depression show cognitive deficits, besides there is also
evidence for metacognitive deficits in memory: depressive patients tend to underestimate their
performance and to be less confident in their judgements. A useful treatment for depression is the
Mindfulness-Based cognitive Therapy (MBCT) which focuses on decentering. Decentering enables a
person to non-judgmentally accept cognitive patterns without engaging or evaluating them through a
shift in perspective. This study aims to answer the question whether there is a difference between
depressive patients and controls in metacognitive skills for the domain of attention. Furthermore, the
study examines the relationship between metacognitive abilities and decentering. Methods: 30
healthy participants and 30 patients with major depression were asked to make judgments of
performance (JOP) and confidence judgements on a rating scale from zero to 100% regarding the
Stroop test. To assess decentering participants filled out the German version of the experiencesQuestionnaire (EQ-D). Results: Depressive patients reveal significantly less decentering abilities
compared to healthy participants. Albeit groups’ metacognitive judgments of performance do not
differ, patients indicate significantly less confidence in their judgements. Finally, data reveal a
significant association between decentering and confidence ratings, but not with judgements of
performance.

60

Contributions

How does preparation in task switching affect subsequent memory
performance?
Mirela Dubravac

University of Bern, Experimental Psychology and Neuropsychology
mirela.dubravac@psy.unibe.ch

Switching tasks produces an immediate performance cost and also reduces later memory for switch
compared to repeat items. Here we investigate whether the opportunity to prepare for task switching
would modulate this memory effect. Preparation was operationalized by long vs. short inter trial
intervals and by using either a predicable AABB task sequence or a cued task switching procedure.
We expected that a predictable task switch will reduce cognitive conflict if enough preparation time
is given. Thus, this study contributes to revealing the gradual nature of top-down control on
subsequent memory performance.

Do SNS and HPA axis activity differ between elite athletes and nonathletes? – A pilot study
Moritz Dümig, Yvonne Daichendt & Linda Becker

Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Institute of Psychology
linda.becker@fau.de

Being physically active can have many health benefits and can be protective against daily stressors.
However, excessive amounts of sports can also be a stressor and can activate the stress systems. It
was investigated whether the diurnal activity of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis differs between elite athletes and non-athletes. N = 18 (9
elite athletes, mean age = 22.2 ± 2.6 years; 13 male) participants provided seven saliva samples
on a non-active day. The area under the curve (AUC) of the diurnal profiles of salivary alphaamylase (sAA), as an index for SNS activity, and of cortisol as a marker of HPA axis activity were
calculated. For sAA, no difference was found between both groups and, thus, SNS activity did not
differ. For cortisol, a marginally significant difference was found (p < .10). The cortisol AUCs were
lower in the elite athletes group (57.6 ± 66.8 nmol/l) than in the non athletes group (101.7 ± 27.8
nmol/l), supporting the view the athletes were stressed less than the non-athletes. It is concluded that
doing elite sports can have an impact on HPA axis activity. However, future studies with larger
sample sizes are needed.

61

Contributions

The Effect of Attitude Accessibility on Early Components of Visual
Attention
Sebastian Dummel

Universität zu Köln, Differentielle Psychologie und Psychologische Diagnostik
sebastian.dummel@uni-koeln.de

Attitudes have been suggested to serve different functions, one of them being an orienting function.
That is, in a complex visual word, objects for which individuals hold attitudes may attract attention.
Roskos-Ewoldsen and Fazio (1992) showed that the effect of attitudes on attention is determined by
the extent to which individuals’ attitudes toward objects are accessible from memory. Here we
additionally examined which components of visual attention—engagement and disengagement—are
affected by attitude accessibility. To manipulate attitude accessibility, participants first judged one set
of pictures of objects according to their liking (high accessibility), another set according to the
objects’ animacy (low accessibility). Participants then performed a dot-probe task, asking them to
indicate the location of a probe. Probe presentation was preceded by the presentation of two objects
from the previous judgment-tasks. On critical trials, one object was from the liking-task, the other
object was from the animacy-task. The probe appeared at one of the two object locations. Responses
were faster when the probe replaced an object form the liking-task than when it replaced an object
from the animacy-task, replicating the effect of attitude accessibility on attention. Additional analyses
suggested that participants had difficulties disengaging their attention from attitude-evoking objects.

Sequential modulation of compatibility-based and no-go-based
backward crosstalk – insights from diffusion model analyses
Moritz Durst & Markus Janczyk

Eberhard Karls University, Psychology
moritz.durst@psycho.uni-tuebingen.de

In multitasking, the backward crosstalk effect (BCE) means that Task 1 performance is influenced by
characteristics of Task 2. For example, (1) RT1 is shorter when the two responses are given on the
same (compatible trial) compared with opposite sides (incompatible conflict-trial; compatibility-based
BCE), and (2) RT1 is longer when Task 2 is a no-go relative to a go task (no-go-based BCE). In two
experimental sessions we investigated the impact of recently experienced trial and conflict history on
the size of such BCEs. Similar to the Gratton effect in standard conflict tasks, clear sequential
modulations were observed for the two kinds of BCEs, which were only present following (1)
compatible trials and (2) go-trials. Recent evidence from mental chronometry studies suggests that the
compatibility-based BCE is located inside the response selection stage, whilst the no-go-based BCE
arises in motor execution. Against this background, a diffusion model analysis was carried out to
reveal the reason(s) for the sequential modulations. As expected, for the compatibility-based BCE,
changes in drift rate explain the sequential modulations, for the no-go-based BCE changes in nondecision time are important.

62

Contributions

Crowding in real depth - The impact of size and defocus blur
Lisa Valentina Eberhardt & Anke Huckauf
Ulm University, General Psychology
lisa.eberhardt@uni-ulm.de

Crowding refers to the phenomenon of reduced stimulus recognition for peripherally presented visual
targets which are flanked by similar stimuli. We tested how the depth of flanking stimuli and their
relative size influenced recognition of crowded targets. Real depth was created by using two screens
and merging their displays via a semi-transparent mirror. We measured recognition performance for
bright Landolt rings (size 0.6°, distance 190cm), while relative depth and size of flankers compared
to targets was varied. Flanker’s relative depth was either in front or behind, closer (170cm, 215cm)
or farther away (150cm, 240cm). Flanker’s size was either physically (same amount of pixel) or
retinal (0.6° of visual angle) constant. Results show, that flankers with a physically constant size
interfere more with target recognition, when they are presented in front of the target, than when they
are presented behind the target. In contrast, flankers with constant retinal size interfere less with
target recognition, when they are presented in front compared to behind the target. This impact of
flanker’s relative size is more pronounced when flankers are presented farther away from the target.
Thus, relative size of flanking stimuli seem to guide processing of target stimuli more than defocus
blur.

Movement Primitives in Unconstrained Dance
Anna-Lena Eckert, Benjamin Knopp & Dominik Endres
Philipps-University, Department of Psychology
eckerta@students.uni-marburg.de

Motivation. According to a long-established hypothesis in motor control, the brain might rely on a
discrete number of simpler elements, or movement primitives (MP), to reduce the tremendous
computational burden underlying motor coordination. However, the validation of MP models from
spontaneous full-body movements is rarely encountered in the literature. Methods. n=17 volunteers
engaged in unconstrained dance while their movements were recorded using Xsens Awinda inertial
motion capture. In the framework of Bayesian Model Selection, the fit of synchronous MP and the
time-varying synergies model [1] with 3-35 components was evaluated. The model quality was
approximated using the Laplace Information Criterion. [2] Results. LAP scores were optimal for
models with ~16-18 MP. Furthermore, the computation of Bayes factors suggested that dance is a
stimulus driven behavior which is influenced by individual characteristics rather than being purely
stimulus-driven or determined only by individual characteristics. Future Research will compare other
MP models (e.g., the anechoic or the spatial MP model) on unconstrained data sets. Interesting
applications in perception research, computer animation and robotics are possible. [1]: d'Avella, A.,
& Tresch, M. C. (2002). NIPS 2002, 141-148. [2]: Endres, D. M. et al. (2013). Frontiers in
computational neuroscience, 7.

63

Contributions

Effects of reward on action-effect learning
Andreas B Eder, Thorsten M Erle & Wilfried Kunde
University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology
andreas.eder@uni-wuerzburg.de

According to modern ideomotor theory, anticipatory representations of action consequences are the
basis for voluntary action control. Research suggests that reward strengthens the acquisition of action
effects, and hence ideomotor learning. Participants in our experiments first learned to associate four
different actions with particular auditory effects. Two effects were additionally rewarded with money,
while two other effects were not rewarded. In a subsequent test phase, the auditory effects of the
acquisition phase served as irrelevant response primes in a speeded reaction time task. Results
showed stronger interference of incongruent primes on responses that generated rewarded effects in
the previous learning phase. Critically, this effect was not obtained with associations to monetary
losses that were equally salient to the participants. These results suggest that associations to rewards
specifically strengthen bindings between actions and their consequences.

Seeing or hearing? – The influence of music and spatial surrounding
on perceived atmosphere
Sonja Ehret, Carolin Schroeder & Roland Thomaschke
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology
sonja.ehret@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

Previous research has shown that music affects the emotional experience of environments. In the
present study we aimed at determining how exactly music and room ambience interact in creating
emotional atmosphere. By conducting two pretests we identified two rooms which strongly contrast in
the valence of their perceived atmosphere. We also identified a musical piece matching each of the
room with regard to perceived valence, respectively. In the experiment proper, 32 participants were
exposed to the four combinations of room and music for 10 minutes each, on two different days.
Immediately after exposal they rated the experienced overall atmosphere. Room valence and musical
valence both significantly affected the experienced overall valence. However, a significant
interaction showed that the valence of music had a stronger effect on overall atmosphere in the
positive room than in the negative room. These findings suggest that positive spatial surroundings
amplify the atmospheric impact of highly valent music.

64

Contributions

Tracking awareness in binocular rivalry using induced pupil
fluctuations
Wolfgang Einhäuser & Immo Schütz

Chemnitz University of Technology, Institute of Physics - Physics of Cognition Group
wolfgang.einhaeuser-treyer@physik.tu-chemnitz.de

Far from being a mere reflex, the pupil light response is modulated by attention and other cognitive
factors. This modulation has been exploited to track the locus of attention as well as awareness to
simple stimuli. We adapt a recently proposed method, referred to as "pupil frequency tagging", to
track awareness of complex stimuli in binocular rivalry. Specifically, we present the image of a face
to one eye and the image of a house to the other. This induces binocular rivalry, perception
alternates between the house and the face image. We modulate the luminance of the two images in
counterphase at a fixed frequency of 1.7Hz such that the overall rivalry dynamics do not change
relative to the presentation of static images. By determining the phase of the pupil oscillation at this
frequency in each 588ms (1/1.7Hz) presentation cycle, we demonstrate that the phase is modulated
by the stimulus the observer perceives as dominant in the respective cycle. This demonstrates that
awareness to complex stimuli modulates the pupil light response similar to volitional attentional shifts.
These findings may also broaden the realm of pupil-based "no report" paradigms from simple
patterns to complex stimuli.

Semantic not orthographic-phonological knowledge is implemented in
context-based predictions during visual word recognition
Susanne Eisenhauer1, Christian J. Fiebach2 & Benjamin Gagl3

Goethe University Frankfurt, Department of Psychology; 2Goethe University, Department of Psychology; Center for
Individual Development and Adaptive Education of Children at Risk (IDeA); Interdisciplinary Center for
Neurosciences; 3Goethe University Frankfurt, Department of Psychology; Center for Individual Development and
Adaptive Education of Children at Risk (IDeA)
eisenhauer@psych.uni-frankfurt.de
1

Visual word recognition can be facilitated through predictions based on previous context. In
addition, word recognition depends on prior knowledge – for example with respect to orthography
or semantics. Indeed, both knowledge and context have been shown to reduce neuronal processing
costs during word recognition, reflected in reduced N400 responses given increased context-based
predictability and higher word frequency. However, word frequency is associated with knowledge at
orthographic, phonological, as well as semantic levels, so that it remains unclear which type of
knowledge most efficiently supports predictive processing of visual words. Here, we investigated the
influence of semantic and orthographic-phonological knowledge on context-based predictions of
visual letter-strings in magnetoencephalography data from 39 participants. Predictable contexts were
realized through repetition priming, while knowledge inherently differed between letter-strings, i.e.,
between words (semantic, phonological, and orthographic knowledge), familiarized pseudowords
(orthographic-phonological knowledge), and novel pseudowords. We observed larger M170
responses for familiarized pseudowords and words compared to novel pseudowords, replicating
previous orthographic expertise effects. Furthermore, repetition resulted in reduced activations across
all knowledge conditions, peaking around 370ms. Importantly, repetition suppression was enhanced
for semantic, but not for orthographic-phonological knowledge. Our findings suggest that contextbased predictive processes in visual word recognition rely primarily on semantic knowledge.

65

Contributions

Delta plots with negative-going slopes as a potential marker of
decreasing response activation in masked semantic priming
Ruben Ellinghaus

University of Tübingen, Department of Psychology
ruben.ellinghaus@uni-tuebingen.de

Delta plots with negative-going slopes (nDPs) reflect the phenomenon that an RT difference between
two conditions is greater for relatively fast than for relatively slow responses. This unusual
distributional pattern has predominantly been observed in the spatial Simon task, where it has been
interpreted as reflecting the selective inhibition of an automatically activated response. The literature
suggesting that a similar fading mechanism influences RTs in masked identity priming inspired us to
check an analogous semantic priming paradigm for nDPs. Consistent with the findings in other
paradigms, two masked semantic priming experiments revealed stronger priming effects for relatively
fast than for relatively slow responses, thus reflecting an nDP. These findings are compatible with the
ideas that the activation produced by masked semantic primes decreases over the course of a trial,
such as that of irrelevant spatial information and of masked identity primes, and that nDPs are a
general signature of within-trial decreases in response activation across different tasks and
paradigms.

Are there opposite pupil responses to different aspects of processing
fluency?
Sophie G. Elschner & Ronald Hübner
Universität Konstanz, Cognitive Psychology
sophie.elschner@uni-konstanz.de

As a theory of aesthetic appreciation, processing fluency postulates a preference for easy to process
stimuli. Among others, it has been demonstrated – to varying degrees – that easy to process
paintings elicit greater pupil response than hard to process ones do (Elschner et al., in press;
Kuchinke et al., 2009). However, paintings require processing on higher, more conceptual stages
where picture meaning plays an integral role in aesthetic judgment. We investigated pupil response
to fluency on a more perceptual level, operationalizing processing fluency as different forms of
symmetry. Participants judged whether a cloud of black dots was symmetric (on the vertical,
horizontal or on both axes) or random, while pupil data was acquired. Preference ratings on a 7point scale were obtained thereafter. Concordant with the fluency theory, response times were faster
and preference ratings higher for easy to process stimuli. However, pupil size was greatest for
harder to process patterns, which contradicts earlier research on pupil dilation to fluency. The
dynamics of pupil size adjustments may therefore reflect processing depth rather than or in addition
to ease. An experiment to rule out confounds due to task differences compared to previous research
and further implications are discussed.

66

Contributions

Dreh Dich immerzu, rundherum und rundherum: Die mentale Rotation
des menschlichen Körpers um die vertikale Achse
Franziska End, Mirjam Ebersbach & Markus Krüger
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universität Greifswald
markuskr@uni-greifswald.de

Im Gegensatz zur mentalen Rotation von abstrakten Reizen wird bei der Rotation menschlicher
Körper oder Körperteilen nicht immer der kürzeste Weg der Transformation gewählt, sondern es
werden physiologische Bewegungsmöglichkeiten und die Position des eigenen Körpers berücksichtigt
(Embodiment). In unserer aktuellen Studie untersuchten wir die mentale Rotation von menschlichen
Körpern. Es wurde eine abgebildete Person mit erhobenem Arm gezeigt, die um 0°, 45°, 90°, 135°
oder 180° (0° Rückansicht, 180° Frontansicht) um eine vertikale Achse rotiert war. Die Aufgabe der
Probanden war es zu entscheiden, welcher Arm gehoben wurde. Die Reaktionszeiten stiegen linear
mit dem Rotationswinkel an. Dies bedeutet, dass die Probanden auf analoge mentale
Transformationen zurückgriffen, um die Aufgabe zu lösen. Es gab jedoch auch Abweichungen von
einem strikten linearen Verlauf. So fiel bei der Rotation um 180° der Anstieg der Reaktionszeiten –
im Vergleich zu den anderen Winkeln - geringer aus als erwartet. Dies steht im Einklang mit
Berichten einiger Probanden, dass sie bei dieser totalen Frontansicht auf andere Strategien
zurückgriffen, wie zum Beispiel den Körper zu kippen oder zu spiegeln. Solche Abweichungen von
einem linearen Verlauf könnten ein Hinweis auf Embodiment im Sinne eines direkten Abgleiches des
Gesehenen mit dem eigenen Körper sein.

Embodied simulations guide the alignment of reference frames in
visuo-spatial and psychological perspective-taking
Thorsten Michael Erle

University of Würzburg
thorsten.erle@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de

Perspective-taking means “trying to understand another’s point of view”, either literally (visuo-spatial)
or metaphorically (psychological perspective-taking; e.g., in empathy). Functionally both kinds share
the same structure: the perspective-taker initiates a switch from the egocentric frame of reference to
an other-centered frame of reference. Research on visuo-spatial perspective-taking has shown that
this involves an embodied simulation, where the body of the perspective-taker is transposed into the
physical location of another person. The present talk applies this embodied transformation account to
psychological perspective-taking – an area where the underlying mechanisms are yet unclear – and
investigates whether psychological characteristics can impact this embodied simulation. In a first
series of studies, participants completed a visuo-spatial perspective-taking paradigm that induces the
above-mentioned embodied simulation. It was measured whether this simulation affects
psychological perspective-taking (measured by perceived similarity or sympathy for another person)
and indeed this was the case. In other studies, it was tested whether this embodied simulation in
visuo-spatial perspective-taking can be affected by imbuing another person with psychological
characteristics (e.g., similarity or sympathy) and again, the hypothesis was confirmed. These results
suggest that embodied simulations guide the alignment of different reference frames for both visuospatial and psychological perspective-taking.

67

Contributions

P3 and pupil dilation predict the subjective experience of time
Benjamin Ernst & Marco Steinhauser
Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
benjamin.ernst@ku.de

A common experience is that when something unexpected happens, time appears to slow down.
Prior research identified an arousal response as a possible underlying source of this time dilation
illusion. Concerning the neural basis of this response, our recent results suggest the phasic release of
norepinephrine (NE) as a likely candidate. To further test this hypothesis, the present study
investigated two indices of phasic NE release, the P3 and pupil dilation, in a visual oddball task.
Participants were asked to estimate the duration of infrequent oddballs relative to a preceding
standard duration. As expected, the P3 amplitude as well as pupil dilation predicted subsequent time
perception. While overestimations were preceded by a pronounced P3 and pupil dilation, these
correlates of the phasic NE release were attenuated before underestimations. Moreover, we found
that the number of standard stimuli preceding an oddball affected all three measures in the same
direction with larger numbers being associated with a longer perceived duration, a larger P3
amplitude, and a larger pupil dilation. Finally, individual average time estimates and pupil dilations
were predicted by the average P3 amplitude. Together, these results support the assumption that the
phasic release of NE contributes to time dilation.

Novel non-salient stimuli detract attention from a novel color singleton
Daniel Ernst1, Stefanie Becker2 & Gernot Horstmann1

1
Bielefeld University & CITEC, Neuro-cognitive Psychology; 2University of Queensland, School of Psychology
daniel.ernst@uni-bielefeld.de

A common question in visual attention research is to which extend attention is biased by bottom-up
factors such as saliency and by top-down factors governed by the task. Expectation discrepancy, as
another factor, is supported by visual search experiments in which participants see a novel stimulus
unannounced and for the first time after several familiarization trials. Recent experiments have shown
that the surprising stimulus does not have to be singled out by saliency in order to draw attention. In
a current eye-tracking study, where in the surprise trial a singleton was presented for the first time,
we manipulated the novelty of the non-singleton feature. In the familiar non-singleton color condition,
the surprising singleton is the only novel element, whereas in the novel non-singleton color condition,
the non-singleton elements are likewise novel. If attention is biased towards novelty, we expect that
the singleton captures attention earlier if the non-singletons have a familiar rather than a novel color.
Results supported this prediction, with gaze being directed earlier on the singleton in the familiar
rather than in the novel non-singleton condition. These results further support the potential of
surprising non-salient stimuli to attract attention even in competition with a surprising color singleton.

68

Contributions

Statistical and orthographical influences on handwriting in German
Jessica Ernst & Eva Belke

Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Sprachwissenschaftliches Institut
ernst@linguistics.rub.de

While spoken word production has been researched intensively for decades, much less is known
about written word production. We investigated whether and how the production of written words in
German by young and older adults and late primary and early secondary school children was
influenced by statistical word properties (bigram frequencies, Experiment 1) and double letter
spellings (as in Falle vs. Falte, Experiment 2). Participants were asked to copy words from a
computer screen onto a tablet, while their reaction times and measures of stroke duration, pause
duration, pressure and writing velocity were recorded, using a special software (Ductus, see Guinet
and Kandel, 2010). We are currently in the process of data coding and analysis. We expect that
our data will elucidate at which age writers start to use internalized frequency information and
orthographic knowledge for writing. In the long run, we hope to make a relevant contribution to
didactic concepts for teaching spelling in primary school in Germany.

Guidance or Setting? Exploring the learnability of computer-based
instructions in a construction task
Shirin Esmaeili Bijarsari, Maria Wirzberger & Günter Daniel Rey
TU Chemnitz, Psychology of learning with digital media
s.esmaeili.bijarsari@googlemail.com

Computer-based technology is becoming increasingly relevant in teaching environments. This results
in enhanced multimodality, but also the necessity of change in teaching methods to achieve optimal
learnability of aspired contents. An integral part of learning, the interplay between mental resources
and different facets of learning scenarios, is reflected in the cognitive load construct, addressed by
the Cognitive Load Theory. The theory suggests that influencing certain aspects of teaching will
reduce demands on learners’ resources and foster the acquisition of knowledge. The presented study
(N = 78, M = 23.1, SD = 3.5) observed changes in cognitive load during the construction of two
LEGO? Mindstorms robots in a 2x2-factorial design. Process-related variations in teaching methods
occurred due to the extent of visual guidance in the instructions, based on the guidance fading
principal. Moreover, color coding of the materials in both the instruction and setting was applied,
inspired by evidence from the field of embodied cognition. The level of task-related cognitive load
was observed by a repeated audio-verbal secondary task during the construction process and
questionnaires on participants’ subjective cognitive load perception. Multiple-choice tests adressed
retention and transfer of the obtained knowledge. Results as well as theoretical and practical
implications are presented.

69

Contributions

Crow’s feet and frown lines – Successful automatic extraction of
authenticity of emotional facial expressions depends on the
surrounding context
Vincent Exner1, Andrea Paulus2 & Julia Kozlik1

University of Greifswald, Psychological Institute; 2Technical University of Munich, Chair of Psychology
vincent.exner@uni-greifswald.de
1

Natural, genuine smiles evoked by felt happiness tend to differ visually from voluntary, posed smiles.
The major difference lies in the absence of the contraction of the orbicularis oculi – posed smiles lack
the proverbial crow’s feet. It has been demonstrated recently that humans are able to automatically
extract whether a facial expression is felt (i.e., authentic) or not, as non-authentic expressions elicit
significantly smaller affective priming effects. This study proposes that the successful automatic
extraction of authenticity from emotional facial expressions depends on its saliency, determined by
the surrounding context in which non-authentic expressions are encountered. Non-authentic smiles
were presented as primes in an affective priming procedure. The context was manipulated by
alternating these primes with primes showing authentic smiles in one experimental block, and with
primes showing frowning faces in a second block, thus inducing a higher saliency of authenticity in
the first block. We found that non-authentic smiles elicit a considerably smaller affective priming
effect when surrounded by authentic smiles, as compared to the context of frowning faces. These
results indicate that extraction of authenticity is context-dependent: posed expressions are more likely
to be processed as non-authentic when authenticity (rather than emotional valence) is salient.

Rapid spatiotopic updating across saccades
Jasper Fabius

Utrecht University, Helmholtz Institute, Experimental Psychology
j.h.fabius@uu.nl

The retinotopic organization of visual information is shifted with each saccade. Yet, we experience a
continuous stream of visual information. The discrepancy between the disrupted retinotopic
organization and apparent perceptual continuity of visual information has been studied for centuries.
There is still an ongoing debate whether perceptual continuity across saccades is illusory, or whether
retinotopic representations of visual information are updated across saccades. Recent studies
provided a considerable amount of evidence in favour of spatiotopic updating of visual information,
enabling perceptual continuity. Importantly, these studies showed that the build-up of spatiotopic
coding takes up to 500 ms, plus saccade latency. Under normal viewing conditions, this would be
too slow to support perceptual continuity, since saccades are made roughly every 300 ms. With a
series of experiments involving a motion illusion (High Phi), we demonstrate that spatiotopic updating
can occur within the latency of normal visually guided saccades, and that the effect of spatiotopic
updating can be measured very rapidly after saccade offset. Together, our results provide a
behavioural demonstration of rapid spatiotopic updating of visual information, that directly
demonstrates perceptual continuity across saccades.

70

Contributions

Investigating phonemic representations in Spanish-English bilinguals
using mouse-tracking: A laboratory/MTurk comparative study
James Benjamin Falandays1, Michael J Spivey1 & Joseph C Toscano2

University of California Merced, Cognitive and Information Sciences; 2Villanova University, Psychological and Brain
Sciences
jfalandays@ucmerced.edu
1

Languages vary in the acoustic properties of their phonemes. For example, the English /b/ is
acoustically similar to the Spanish /p/. A debate in psycholinguistics concerns whether bilinguals
have separate phoneme representations for each language, or one set shared cross-lingusitically. If
bilinguals have separate phonemic representations for each language, one might expect that they
will respond differently to a given acoustic stimulus depending on which language-specific
representations they access. This hypothesis was tested using mousetracking methods in the
laboratory and on MTurk. Comparing results between these two platforms may yield insights into
mousetracking methods. Bilingual subjects were placed into either an English-speaking mode or a
Spanish-speaking mode, with a monolingual English group as control. On each trial, subjects viewed
pictures of objects for Spanish or English word-initial minimal pairs (e.g. “bear” vs. “pear,” or
“beso” vs. “peso”) and heard speech stimuli varying along a continuum from a pre-voiced /b/ to a
voiceless aspirated /p/. Subjects clicked the image whose name begins with the phoneme they
heard. Language background data were collected to determine how effects vary with individual
language experience. Mouse trajectory results are discussed with respect to the debate regarding
how separate or conjoined bilinguals’ phonemic representations are.

Does social-emotional feedback diminish age-related learning
impairments?
Nicola Kristina Ferdinand

Saarland University, Department of Psychology
n.ferdinand@mx.uni-saarland.de

Many cognitive functions decline with increasing age. By contrast, processing of affective
information seems to remain relatively intact. Recent research has also demonstrated that affective
influences can modulate cognitive functioning and lead to an enhancement in diverse cognitive
tasks. The aim of this event-related potentials (ERP) study was to examine, whether affective material
can ameliorate age-related impairments in feedback-induced learning. For this purpose, we used a
probabilistic learning task in which younger (19-30 years) and older (70-79 years) participants
learned the assignment of pictures to response keys via feedback. Feedback consisted of either
emotionally neutral faces (with different background colors for positive vs. negative feedback) or
emotional faces (smiling vs. disgusted-looking). Emotional feedback resulted in better learning for
older but not younger adults. ERPs showed that the initial stage of feedback processing (reflected in
the Feedback-Related Negativity, FRN) was not modulated by feedback emotionality. In a later stage
reflecting working memory updating after task-relevant events (indexed by the P300), younger adults
updated more after negative feedback in general. However, older adults did so only after negative
emotional feedback. We infer that social-emotional feedback seems more relevant for older adults
than neutral feedback and thus improves feedback-induced learning.

71

Contributions

Predicting Visual Attention is not an easy Task - even for Experts!
Sebastian Feuerstack1 & Bertram Wortelen2

OFFIS; 2Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg, Kognitive Psychologie
feuerstack@offis.de
1

With more and more systems working autonomously on our behalf, like air planes, trains, ships, cars
or factories, the role of a human changes from interaction and control to supervision and
intervention. But how to design such autonomous system interfaces so that they can efficiently be
monitored by a human? In a study with 20 car drivers and 8 human factors (HF) experts we figured
out that individuals are in fact not very good in predicting visual attention for even a simple task like
an overtaking maneuver on a highway compared to the visual attention distribution that we
measured with an eye tracker in a car driving simulator with the same car drivers (Individual HF
expert: R2=0.15/SD=0.259; Individual car drivers: R2=0.10/SD=292). Interestingly, averaging
individual predictions massively improves the prediction quality (car drivers: R=0.52; HF experts:
R=0.94). We present a software tool that can efficiently capture operator domain knowledge from
large and geographically distributed expert groups via the web, can simulate human visual attention
based on a cognitive model, and finally generates valid visual attention predictions. We argue that
the insights gained by such models will improve interface designs.

Visual stability influences aesthetic appreciation
Martin Georg Fillinger & Ronald Hübner
University of Konstanz, Psychology
martin.fillinger@uni-konstanz.de

Pictures whose arrangement of elements are considered as balanced are usually liked more than
pictures with an unbalanced arrangement. This phenomenon motivated researchers to invent formal
measures of visual balance, most of which rely on physical concepts such as the symmetry of the
distribution of ‘mass’, or the distance of the center of ‘mass’ from the center of the picture. Although
these measures predict balance and liking ratings, at least for simple images, they are not, or only
partly, sensitive to image rotation. In our study, however, where we used rotated versions of pictures
constructed of several polygons, we found that balance and liking ratings were reliably affected by
rotation. From this result, we hypothesized that visual stability in the sense of the ‘gravitational’
stability of the picture elements might also contribute to judgments of visual balance. As expected,
further experiments, in which participants had to judge balance or stability of such stimuli, revealed
a strong correlation between the two corresponding ratings. Moreover, there was a reliable
association between stability ratings and liking. In contrast, the balance measures failed to predict
liking consistently. Together, our results suggest that the concept of visual balance should be
extended by visual stability.

72

Contributions

Modality compatibility biases voluntary choice of response modality in
task switching
Edina Fintor, Edita Poljac, Denise N. Stephan & Iring Koch
RWTH Aachen University
edina.fintor@psych.rwth-aachen.de

The term modality compatibility refers to the similarity between stimulus modality and the modality of
response-related sensory consequences (e.g., vocal responses produce auditory effects). Previous
results showed smaller task-switching costs when participants switched between modality compatible
tasks (auditory-vocal and visual-manual) compared to switching between modality incompatible tasks
(auditory-manual and visual-vocal). In the present study using a voluntary task switching paradigm
(VTS), participants chose the response modality (vocal or manual) to indicate the location of either a
visual or an auditory stimulus. We examined whether free task choices were biased by modality
compatibility, so that modality compatible tasks are preferred in VTS. The choice probability analysis
indicated that participants tended to choose the response modality which is compatible to the
stimulus modality. We also found that when participants switched the response modality, they
switched to the modality compatible tasks more often. More interestingly, even though participants
freely chose the response modality, modality compatibility still influenced task-switching costs,
showing larger costs with incompatible mappings. The findings that modality compatibility influenced
choice behaviour suggest components of both top-down control and bottom-up effects of selecting a
response modality for different stimulus modalities.

Binding between memory representations influences serial
dependence
Cora Fischer1, Stefan Czoschke1, Benjamin Peters1, Benjamin Rahm2, Jochen Kaiser1 & Christoph
Bledowski1
Goethe-University, Institute of Medical Psychology; 2Albert-Ludwigs-University, Medical Psychology
cora.fischer@med.uni-frankfurt.de

1

Serial dependence refers to a systematic bias that attracts present towards recent visual inputs. It has
been assumed to increase the stability of perception, as recently attended input has the strongest
bias. Recent studies have suggested that serial dependence is a mnemonic rather than a purely
perceptual phenomenon. However, studies so far have required memorizing only a single item at a
time. Hence, it remains unclear which factors besides temporal proximity influence serial
dependence. One possibility is that attraction could be tuned by factors that bind items into an
object across trials. To examine this, we asked subjects to memorize two sequentially presented
stimuli (S1 and S2). In addition, items had one of two possible colors. Hence, across trials items
could be bound together either by their corresponding serial position or color. Serial dependence
was enhanced for items with congruent serial position, i.e. the current S1 was attracted more
strongly to the previous S1 than previous S2, and S2 was biased more strongly by the previous S2
than previous S1. In contrast, color congruency did not modulate serial dependence. These findings
indicate that serial position of items encoded into working memory determines serial dependence in
addition to temporal proximity.

73

Contributions

The sensory-motor nature of number concepts and arithmetic
Martin H. Fischer1 & Samuel Shaki2

University of Potsdam; 2Ariel University
martinf@uni-potsdam.de
1

The concept of number has traditionally been considered as a prototypical instance of abstract(ed)
knowledge. It denotes the size of any arbitrary set of objects, thus seemingly preventing systematic
correlations with sensory or motor features. Yet, numerosity does co-vary with physical parameters in
perception and action. In this presentation, we describe how number processing obligatorily
activates sensory and motor features: both sensory and motor processing are improved in left vs.
right space following the presentation of small vs. large numbers. These links are bi-directional and
suffice to identify numbers as embodied concepts. Moreover, these space-magnitude associations
influence mental arithmetic and everyday quantitative reasoning (cf. Fischer & Shaki, 2014).
Implications for research and theorizing will be discussed. Reference: Fischer, M. H. & Shaki, S.
(2014). Spatial Associations in Numerical Cognition: From single digits to arithmetic. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67(8), 1461-1483.

Arousal drives adaptation to conflict: Transcutaneous vagus nerve
stimulation (tVNS) enhances conflict-triggered adjustment of cognitive
control
Rico Fischer1, Carlos Ventura-Bort2, Alfons Hamm1 & Mathias Weymar2

1
University of Greifswald; 2University of Potsdam
rico.fischer@uni-greifswald.de

Response conflicts play a prominent role in the flexible adaptation of behavior as they represent
context-signals that indicate the necessity for the recruitment of cognitive control. Previous studies
have highlighted the functional roles of the affectively aversive and arousing quality of the conflict
signal in triggering the adaptation process. In this study we tested the causal impact of arousal on
the behavioral and electrophysiological marker for adaptation to conflict. Participants performed a
response conflict task in two separate sessions with either transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation
(tVNS) to directly modulate the arousal system or neutral sham stimulation. In both sessions the N2
and P3 event-related potentials (ERP) were assessed. In line with previous findings, conflict
interference, the N2 and P3 amplitude were reduced after conflict. Most importantly, this adaptation
to conflict was enhanced under tVNS compared to sham stimulation for conflict interference and the
N2 amplitude. No effect of tVNS on the P3 component was found. Therefore, by proving a direct
involvement of arousal in the adaptation to conflict, which may be linked to promoting activity of the
locus coeruleus-norepinephrine system, the present findings add important pieces to the
understanding of the neurophysiological mechanisms of conflict-triggered adjustment of cognitive
control.

74

Contributions

On the compositionality, timing and coordination of complex
movements.
Tamar Flash

Weizmann Inst. of Science, Dept of CS and Applied Math, Weizmann Inst. of Science
tamar.flash@gmail.com

In my talk I will discuss several research directions taken to explore different principles underlying the
construction and control of complex movements. One important topic is motor compositionality,
examining the nature of the primitives underlying the construction of complex movements at different
levels of the motor hierarchy. Another topic is motor timing, investigating the principles dictating the
timing of complex motor behaviors regarding the durations of both different motion segments and the
total movement durations. Finally the third topic to be discussed is motor coordination and the
mapping between end-effector and joint motions for both upper limb and locomotion movements
using various dimension reduction approaches. The mathematical models applied combine
optimization models and geometrical approaches. Finally I will discuss open questions related to
these approaches and future directions.

Capacity limitations of dishonesty
Anna Foerster, Robert Wirth, Wilfried Kunde & Roland Pfister
University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology III
anna.foerster@uni-wuerzburg.de

Unrehearsed dishonest responding entails an effortful two-step process of the inhibition of the
automatically activated honest response and the generation of the dishonest response, even in the
case of yes/no responses to simple questions. Two experiments examine the role of this two-step
process in the stages of information processing. Together, the effect propagation logic and the locusof-slack logic localized dishonest processes mostly in the central capacity-limited response selection
stage but also in the late capacity-limited response monitoring stage. Surprisingly, dishonest
responding also drew more strongly on perceptual processes than honest responding. The results
demonstrate a pervasive impact of the two-step process in dishonest responding that mostly recruits
capacity-limited resources. Moreover, the experiments point out a limitation of the underlying
paradigm as the involved monitoring processes could overshadow potential motoric effects of
dishonest responding.

75

Contributions

Endogenous Cueing by Emotional Faces: Anticipatory Attentional
Orienting Based on Visible and Masked Emotional Information
Timea Folyi, Michaela Rohr & Dirk Wentura
Saarland University, Department of Psychology
t.folyi@mx.uni-saarland.de

During endogenous cueing, centrally presented cues are utilized to direct attention to a designated
peripheral target location. Simple cues are typically used in this paradigm, as the task-relevant
information (e.g., color) and the associated spatial meaning (e.g., if color green – target appears
right) need to be interpreted before attention allocation. We demonstrated that participants can
initiate anticipatory attentional shifts based on the perceptually and semantically complex cue
information carried by emotional facial expressions (e.g., joy emotion signals one target location
and anger emotion the opposite target location). Cueing by emotional faces emerged remarkably
fast, already at 300 ms cue-target asynchrony, both based on contrasting affective valence (i.e., joy
vs. anger; Experiment 1) and specific negative emotions (e.g., sadness vs. fear; Experiment 2a,b,c).
Moreover, even masked presented emotional faces could be utilized to control anticipatory attention,
based on valence (Experiment 3) and also more differentiated emotional information (i.e., sadness
vs. anger; Experiment 4). In a further experiment we tested the borders of the time course of the
cueing effect. Results of Experiment 5 suggest that 150 ms cue-target asynchrony set a limit to
endogenous cueing by emotional faces. Possible underlying mechanisms of cueing by emotional
faces will be discussed.

Visual working memory biases attention in an involuntarily objectbased manner: Evidence from visual search with varying targets
Rebecca M. Förster & Werner X. Schneider

Bielefeld University, Neurocognitive Psychology & Cognitive Interaction Technology Cluster of Excellence CITEC
rebecca.foerster@uni-bielefeld.de

Attentional biasing in visual search for varying targets requires that a target template is stored in
visual working memory (VWM). It is unknown whether all or only search-relevant features of a VWM
template bias attention during search. Notably, if VWM maintains objects in the form of bound
features then all features will bias attention in an object-based manner, and biasing effects might be
ranked by feature relevance. This was investigated in several visual search experiments. Within one
experimental series relying on saccades, a cue varying in color and identity depicted the target prior
to each search trial. Participants had to saccade to the target predefined by its identity only; color
was irrelevant. Saccades went more often and faster to the target when it matched the cue not only
in its target-defining identity but also in the irrelevant color. Moreover, cue-colored distractors
captured the eyes more often than different-colored distractors, even if cue and target were never
colored the same. Because participants were informed about the misleading color, this result argues
against a strategical and voluntary usage of color. Instead, search-irrelevant features biased attention
obligatorily arguing for the option of involuntary top-down control by object-based VWM templates.

76

Contributions

Gaussian Process Modeling of Preferential Choice Dynamics
Mary Frame1, Joseph Houpt2 & Joseph Johnson3

Wright State University, Wright State Research Institute; 2Wright State University, Department of Psychology;
Miami University, Department of Psychology
mary.frame@wright.edu

1
3

Response dynamics is a robust process-tracing method that provides a window into continuously
cascading cognition across a variety of domains, from linguistic processing to preferential decision
making. With the increased popularity of movement tracking, several inferential statistical tests have
been proposed, although most reduce the movement to a single value. Point values such as average
absolute deviation and xflips are valuable, but lose the rich dynamics of individual trajectories. We
employed a state of the art statistical analysis with Gaussian Process regression modeling to analyze
mouse tracking data with a functional version of repeated measures ANOVA. With this method, we
modeled full movement trajectories accounting for subject and condition. We applied this method to
preferential choice data between gambles of varying riskiness from Koop & Johnson (2013) and
data from an unpublished follow-up study testing similar basic preferential choices conducted with
three different motion tracking input devices. By using Gaussian Process regression, we captured
variation due to riskiness and device across full trajectories and more broadly demonstrated an
approach for inferring differences across conditions.

Sensorimotor cues giving rise to independent learning of motor
memories
David W. Franklin

Technical University of Munich, Department of Sport and Health Sciences
david.franklin@tum.de

The human sensorimotor control system has exceptional abilities to perform skilful action despite ever
changing conditions. This occurs partially through the formation of independent motor memories:
internal models that predict and compensate for the external environment. To perform tasks
effectively our sensorimotor control system continuously updates the models of internal and external
dynamics. Importantly we are able to switch from one task to another with no decrement in
performance. Therefore a critical question in motor learning is what cues allow the formation and
learning of a new independent motor memory. The effectiveness of these cues can be rigorously
tested using an interference paradigm, where a participant attempts to learn opposing dynamics. No
learning is possible without extra contextual information, therefore any learning can be attributed to
the context. In a series of experiments using robotic systems, we have examined how past or future
movements allow the independent learning of opposing dynamics. These results show that motor
memories are encoded not simply as a mapping from current state to motor command but are
encoded in terms of the history of sensorimotor states. Moreover we demonstrate that different
sensory modalities exhibit district characteristics in terms of both learning and generalization.

77

Contributions

The impact of cognitive control demands on subsequent memory
performance
Michèle Friedli & Beat Meier

University of Bern, Experimental Psychology and Neuropsychology
michele.friedli@psy.unibe.ch

The purpose of this project is to investigate how cognitive control demands at encoding influence
subsequent memory performance. This provides new insights into the cognitive control processes
invoked by cognitive conflict. Towards this goal, we manipulate the amount and the type of conflict.
For example, we use a task switching paradigm in a study phase in which the participants carry out
two classification tasks on different stimuli. In a subsequent memory test, we compare performance
for switch and repetition trials. The results show that in the study phase, switch stimuli produce
performance costs. In the test phase, subsequent memory is typically lower for conflict stimuli (i.e.
switch stimuli) compared to non-conflict stimuli (i.e. repeat stimuli). Here, higher cognitive control
demands at encoding are associated with lower subsequent memory performance. However, the
specific effects of conflict stimuli on memory performance depend on the type of conflict and also on
the duration of the study-test interval. We introduce a new framework that account for the conflicting
results reported in the literature.

Pimping Inhibition: anodal tDCS enhances stop-signal reaction time
Maximilian Achim Friehs & Christian Frings
University of Trier
friehs@uni-trier.de

The Stop-Signal Task (SST) is assumed to reliably measure response inhibition, specifically, in this
task participants sometimes have to withhold a response according to the onset of a sudden cue. The
response inhibition process is calculated via the Stop-Signal Reaction Time (SSRT; Verbruggen &
Logan, 2009). The right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (rDLPFC) plays a key role in goal directed
cognitive control in general and particularly an increased activation has been associated with better
SST performance, leading to shorter SSRT. We stimulated the rDLPFC in a pre-post design using a
modified tDCS procedure compared to previous studies. A 9 cm² anode was always positioned over
the rDLPFC while the 35 cm² cathode was placed over the left deltoid. We contrasted an anodal
stimulation condition with sham stimulation and expected an increase in performance after anodal
tDCS, as evidenced by a decrease in SSRT. In a sample of N = 57 healthy adults, we found a
significant time x tDCS-condition interaction in the expected direction. Control analysis confirmed
that the statistically significant decrease in SSRT after anodal tDCS was not due to generally faster
reaction times. These results show that anodal tDCS applied to the rDLPFC can modulate cognitive
inhibition processes.

78

Contributions

How sequential changes in reward expectation modulate cognitive
control: pupillometry as a tool to monitor dynamic changes in reward
expectation
Kerstin Fröber1, Ferdinand Pittino2 & Gesine Dreisbach1

University of Regensburg, Experimental Psychology; 2University of Ulm, Experimental Psychology
kerstin.froeber@ur.de

1

Much evidence suggests that performance contingent reward modulates cognitive flexibility and
stability. For example, in voluntary task switching, it has been shown that unchanged high reward
promotes cognitive stability whereas increases or decreases in reward prospect promote cognitive
flexibility (higher voluntary switch rate, VSR). Pupil diameter has been shown to respond to reward
prospect as well as task switching manipulations and thus appears to be the ideal tool to learn more
about the processes underlying these reward-modulated decisions. Therefore, we measured the pupil
dilation in a voluntary task switching experiment with randomly changing reward magnitudes.
Again, VSR was lowest when reward remained high, intermediate when reward remained low, and
highest when reward increased or decreased. Pupil diameter was generally higher in switch trials as
compared to repetition trials. More importantly, the pupil responded dynamically to the reward
manipulation: the pupil dilation was larger in high than in low reward trials, and the phasic dilation
after a reward cue was highest when reward prospect increased and lowest when reward prospect
decreased. Therefore, pupil diameter seems to be a useful tool to monitor dynamic changes in
reward expectation and effort exertion.

Recognizing emotions from normal and from whispered voices
Sascha Frühholz

University of Zurich, Department of Psychology
sascha.fruehholz@uzh.ch

Whispered vocalizations have an extremely impoverished acoustic quality, thus imposing a
challenge to the human neural system to accurately perceive emotions expressed in these voices. I
present new data about how the neural system recognizes emotions from normal and from
whispered vocalizations while we recorded brain activity in human listeners using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Our data show, first, that emotions from normal voices are
decoded in regions of the auditory cortex that mainly decode spectral voice information based on
the salient pitch information in normal voices. Second, emotions from whispered voices are decoded
in a compensatory neural network largely outside the core auditory system in frontal brain regions
and in higher-level auditory regions that mainly decode temporal voice information as the only
available information in whispered voices. Third, a connectivity analysis demonstrates that
recognizing emotions from whispered voices requires information exchange in a complex and largescale neural network. Fourth, I will quickly compare the brain data with our recently developed
computer algorithms that were trained to decode emotions from whispered voices. Taken together,
emotions can be recognized from whispered voices, although less accurate and only at the costs of
considerably neural and computational compensation mechanisms.

79

Contributions

Active tactile search strategies improve localization of touch
Xaver Fuchs & Tobias Heed

Bielefeld University, Faculty of Psychology & Sports Science
xaver.fuchs@uni-bielefeld.de

Visual localization often uses a two-step strategy: Gaze is first directed from far away to near the
target; a second saccade then uses online visual information to correct the remaining error. We
tested whether tactile localization with a hand uses a similar strategy. Here, variability can arise
from tactile, proprioceptive and motor systems. For a movement towards touch, the 2D skin target
location must be converted into a 3D target location for the finger. Tactile search strategies based on
online tactile information might compensate for inaccuracy of initial goal-directed movements to
touch. Participants received a brief touch on their forearm with their eyes closed. They first touched
the target location and were allowed to then correct the indicated location by moving the finger on
the arm. We observed different search strategies. Most search paths were directed towards the
correct target location. However, some participants regularly explored seemingly random directions.
Even this random search improved localization. Thus, the tactile system resembles vision, in that an
initial target representation appears to provide only coarse resolution and guides a first motor
response; the final target location is then assessed in a second step through online use of sensory
information.

Objective Measurement and Prediction of Processing Capacity
Isabella Fuchs-Leitner, Lisa Falschlunger & Othmar Lehner
University of Applied Sciences Upper Austria
isabella.fuchs-leitner@fh-steyr.at

The objective measurement and prediction of processing load and processing capacity during a
specific task is still one major aim in vision research. We set out to exploit a very well controlled
setting: an everyday working place scenario, in which the participants had to complete tasks
involving visualized data on a computer screen. In a prior experiment, we analysed eye movement
measures and subjective judgments on cognitive effort within a structural equation model, yet were
unable to find clear evidence whether high levels of working memory span reduce cognitive load.
Here we thus readdress this hypothesis within the framework of Lavie’s load theory of selective
attention and cognitive control to distinguish between the specific effects of perceptual and cognitive
loads. In the current experiment, we recorded eye movements during conditions of varying
perceptual load (low vs. high) while controlling for working memory load. Eye movement variables
as well as scan path characteristics were analysed. Based on the findings, we discuss the adequacy
of the predefined eye movement measures as objective measurements for processing capacity during
visual tasks and elaborate on their predictive power potential.

80

Contributions

Simon says, do not turn by 90 degrees - investigating the impact of
stimulus material, stimulus orientation and inner speech habits on the
Simon effect
Miriam Gade1, Michel D Druey2 & Marko Paelecke3

Katholische Universität Eichstätt-Ingolstadt; 2University of Konstanz; 3University of Würzburg
miriam.gade@ku.de

1

In Simon-type interference tasks, participants are asked to perform a two-choice reaction on a
stimulus dimension (e.g. color) while ignoring the stimulus position. Commonly robust compatibility
effects are found, i.e. faster reactions when the relevant stimulus attribute and the assigned response
match the location of the stimulus. Simon effects are regularly attributed to a fast, non-verbal
processing route. To examine the stability of this effect and the assumed dominance of the fast, nonverbal processing route, we manipulated stimulus material (gratings vs. words) as well as orientation
(horizontal vs. vertical). Results of our first experiment point to a malleability of the Simon effects by
both factors, up to an inversion of classical Simon effect for vertically oriented words. In further
experiments, we could rule out strategic modulations and replicate the inversed effect. One cause for
this inversion might be the habitual use of inner speech for self-instruction that overrides the
automatic processing route. Therefore, we assessed individual differences in inner speech habits.
We analyzed the data with multilevel analysis simultaneously taking into account personality as well
as performance measures.

Reading at the speed of speech: Visual language perception at ~5 Hz
Benjamin Gagl1, Julius Golch2, Stefan Hawelka3, Jona Sassenhagen2, David Poeppel4 & Christian J.
Fiebach5

Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt; Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education
of Children at Risk (IDeA); 2Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt; 3Centre for Cognitive
Neuroscience, University of Salzburg; 4Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics; Department of Psychology,
New York University; 5Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt; Center for Individual Development
and Adaptive Education of Children at Risk (IDeA); Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics
gagl@psych.uni-frankfurt.de
1

Across languages, the speech signal is characterized by an ~5 Hz rhythm (range: 4.3 - 5.4) of the
amplitude modulation spectrum, reflecting the processing of linguistic information chunks at on
average every 200 ms. Interestingly, this is also the typical eye-fixation duration during reading.
Prompted by this observation, we estimated the sampling frequency at which the eyes sample text
(i.e., the eye-movement sampling frequency) for German speakers, and demonstrate that they read
sentences at a rate of ~5 Hz (range 3.9-6 Hz for a sample of 50 readers). We then conducted a
meta-analysis (90 studies) to examine the generality of this finding. The meta-analysis replicates a 5
Hz sampling rate in German. Across different languages, however, the fixation-based sampling
frequency varied between 3.8-5.4 Hz (mean: 4.5 Hz), with a systematic reduction from easy to
difficult (e.g., in terms of letter-to-sound conversion rules) writing systems. These results demonstrate a
remarkable temporal alignment between reading and speech processing in easy-to-process writing
systems. We propose that language systems tuned to speech perception drive voluntary eye
movements in reading, to supply information to linguistic processes at an optimal uptake rate.

81

Contributions

Information use in intertemporal choice: Visual feedback alleviates
melioration
Felix Gaisbauer & Hansjörg Neth

Universität Konstanz, Department of Psychology
felix.gaisbauer@uni-konstanz.de

Should I have another drink now and risk a worse hangover tomorrow? Should I spend my money
on this item or rather save it for retirement? When the consequences of decisions yield conflicting
rewards over time, humans frequently fail to choose the best global option in the presence of a
locally more attractive, but globally inferior option — a preference known as melioration.
Melioration has been demonstrated to persist across a range of experimental set-ups, even including
normative, prospective feedback on optimal performance. In a between-subjects experiment, we
demonstrate that a simple environment that renders rewards contingent upon as few as the last three
trials can induce a well-studied finding of intertemporal choice: Whereas participants in a condition
with deterministic rewards learn to identify and exploit a globally superior option (maximization),
participants in a condition with probabilistic rewards tend to settle at stable suboptimal performance
(melioration). In a second experiment, we mirror participants‘ choices and rewards of their last three
trials. Using the same (deterministic vs. probabilistic) manipulation of the reward scheme,
participants now mostly approach maximization in both conditions. Thus, some forms of visual
feedback support participants in forming adequate representations to overcome melioration in
intertemporal choice.

Priming of Grasp Affordance in an Ambiguous Object
Patricia Garrido-Vásquez1, Eileen Wengemuth2 & Anna Schubö2

Department of Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Justus Liebig University Giessen; 2Cognitive
Neuroscience of Perception and Action, Experimental and Biological Psychology, Philipps University Marburg
pgarridovas@gmail.com

1

Object affordance refers to possibilities of interaction with objects in our environment, for example
grasping. Previous research shows that affording objects activate the motor system and attract
attention. The present study relates electrophysiology to overt motor behavior in the context of object
affordance. An ambiguous target (an elongated wooden object) was primed either with an affording
(pencils) or non-affording (trees) context, and we measured event-related potentials and grasping
behavior in response to the target. Despite being physically identical across both conditions, the
target elicited an enhanced posterior P1 component in the affording condition. This indicates that
more attention was drawn to it. The posterior N1 component was reduced by the affording context,
potentially related to the processing of action properties of objects. We also observed an enhanced
frontal negativity for the target in the affording context, which has previously been related to
activation of the brain’s motor system by tools. Moreover, priming influenced motor behavior
directly: grip aperture in response to the target was larger when trees rather than pencils had been
primed. Thus, our findings indicate that an ambiguous object primed with an affording context may
acquire grasp affordance and directly affect motor behavior.

82

Contributions

A two-factor model of the visual complexity of abstract patterns
Andreas Gartus & Helmut Leder

University of Vienna, Department of Basic Psychological Research and Research Methods
andreas.gartus@univie.ac.at

The quantification of visual complexity is relevant for many areas of research like usability
engineering or empirical aesthetics. Therefore, many attempts have been made to derive measures
of complexity from objective image properties. It has been argued that visual complexity is a
multidimensional construct consisting of at least two dimensions: A quantitative dimension increasing
complexity and a structural, order-related dimension setting an upper bound on complexity. In this
work, we studied human complexity perception using two independent sets of abstract black-andwhite patterns. A range of computational measures of complexity was calculated from the patterns
and combined using linear regression and machine learning to predict human evaluations of image
complexity. Our results confirm two-factor models of perceived visual complexity consisting of a
quantitative and a structural factor (mirror symmetry) for both of our stimulus sets. Furthermore, a nonlinear transformation of the structural factor giving more influence to small deviations from symmetry
greatly increased explained variance in one of the two stimulus sets. In sum, we demonstrate the
multidimensional nature of human complexity perception and present a comprehensive quantitative
model of visual complexity of abstract black-and-white patterns. Similar models of visual complexity
might be useful in future applications.

Dual task performance reflects sequence learning-based prediction
Robert Gaschler1, Fang Zhao1, Eva Röttger2 & Hilde Haider2

Department of Psychology, FernUniversität in Hagen; 2Department of Psychology, Universität zu Köln
robert.gaschler@fernuni-hagen.de

1

Past work suggests that sequence learning is compromised by dual tasking, because participants use
regularly sequenced stimuli and responses of the sequence learning task as well as the randomly
sequenced events in the other task to predict upcoming trials. Here we report an experiment (N=21)
which offers a means to track prediction in dual tasking when participants have acquired sequence
knowledge beforehand. During single task sequence learning blocks, participants reacted to the
position of a shape (6 horizontal positions, 6 keys) which followed a first order repeating sequence.
In the following dual task blocks, a second shape was added (randomly while sparing the location
occupied by the repeating sequence). Participants now had to respond to two positions in each trial.
RTs differed substantially for the two shapes, suggesting that participants indeed distinguished the
shapes. More importantly, RTs for both shapes were influenced by whether the current randomly
placed shape occupied a position that would be occupied in the regular repeating sequence at
upcoming trial n+1 or trial n+2.

83

Contributions

Assimilation and Contrast in Evaluative Conditioning and Moral
Judgments - An Ecological Perspective
Anne Gast1, Fabia Högden1, Christian Unkelbach1, Adam Galinsky2 & Joris Lammers1

University of Cologne; 2University of Columbia
anne.gast@uni-koeln.de
1

In evaluative conditioning the neutral CS usually changes its valence into the direction of the US it
was paired with. Evaluative conditioning effects are thus typically assimilative in nature. We argue
that this assimilative dominance might by due to a property of most stimulus ecologies: positive
information is more likely to occur with positive information than with negative information and
negative information is more likely to occur with negative information. We tested this hypothesis in a
preregistered experiment (N = 200), in which we manipulated the evaluative consistency of the
context in which CS-US pairs were presented. These contexts either had a “normal ecology” or a
“reversed ecology”, in which positive stimuli were more likely to co-occur with negative stimuli and
vice versa. We found that the evaluative conditioning effect was moderated by this manipulation.
While standard EC effects were found in the normal ecology condition, this effect was reduced in the
reversed ecology. In a related series of studies, we found an analogous effect on moral judgments.
Moral character inferences based on behavioral information were stronger in normal than in
reversed contexts. We discuss potentially underlying cognitive processes, as well as the relevance
and limitations of the findings.

Bewertung kritischer Verkehrssituationen während einer
vollautomatisierten Fahrt
Leonie Gauer

Katholische Universität Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, Allgemeine Psychologie II
Leonie.Gauer@audi.de

Die Rolle des Fahrers wandelt sich mit wachsender Fahrzeugautomation. So wird der Nutzer eines
Fahrzeugs vom aktiv beteiligten Akteur zum Überwacher eines teilautomatisierten Systems. Er nimmt
so die Rolle des Beifahrers ein. Während der vollautomatisierten Fahrt übergibt er seine Fahraufgabe
gänzlich an das System und wird damit zum Passagier. Um den Nutzer an seine Rolle
heranzuführen muss die Informationsgestaltung auf dessen Bedürfnisse abgestimmt werden. Dazu
müssen zunächst automatisierte Fahrmanöver identifiziert werden, die sich zum Abbilden typischer
Verkehrssituationen im experimentellen Setting eignen und neue Fahrfunktionen erlebbar machen.
Um dies zu erreichen ist eine Realfahrzeugstudie geplant, dessen Ergebnisse in diesem Beitrag
veröffentlicht werden sollen. Die Versuchsteilnehmer werden wiederholt als Beifahrer automatisiert
durch einen Parcours mit verschiedenen Verkehrssituationen gefahren. Dabei wird die jeweilige Rolle
variiert, indem der Fahrersitz während der Fahrt besetzt wird (TN= Beifahrer) oder frei bleibt (TN=
Mitfahrer). Nach jeder Situation bewerten die Probanden die wahrgenommene Kritikalität der
Situation. Zusätzlich werden Blickbewegungen und Situationen erfasst, die als besonders
unangenehm bewertet werden. Durch die Ergebnisse sollen Fahrsituationen abgeleitet werden, die
die Analyse des Informationsbedarfes während vollautomatisierter Fahrten in Realfahrtstudien
ermöglichen.

84

Contributions

Can handwriting improve reasoning performance?
Lupita Estefania Gazzo Castaneda, Regina E Fabry & Markus Knauff
University of Giessen, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science
estefania.gazzo@psychol.uni-giessen.de

The belief bias describes people’s tendency to reason in accordance with background beliefs, even
when they are in conflict with an argument’s logical validity. We investigated whether handwriting
can help overcome this bias. Initial experimental evidence suggests that experts can benefit from
handwriting, because they can apply their skills in operating with logical notations. The question
arises whether laypeople can also benefit from handwriting. To investigate this question, we
presented syllogisms to laypeople. The content of the syllogisms and the validity of the conclusion
were either congruent or incongruent. Participants were asked to judge whether the conclusion
follows logically from the premises. Only in half of these tasks participants had the opportunity to use
pen and paper to take down notes. Results show that laypeople did not benefit from this opportunity.
Rather, their performance deteriorated in the pen-and-paper condition. Furthermore, only
performance in the non-paper-and-pencil condition was dependent on working memory, but not the
performance in the paper-and-pencil condition. Our results suggest that handwriting has an influence
on reasoning performance that goes beyond offloading information from working memory onto
paper. We discuss these results from the perspective of research on enculturation and distributed
cognition.

How the fine-motor skills of 9-month-old infants influence their
predictive grasping behavior
Gloria Gehb, Claudia Kubicek, Bianca Jovanovic & Gudrun Schwarzer
Justus-Liebig-University, Developmental Psychology
gloria.gehb@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Several studies have shown that fine-motor experiences facilitate the development of cognitive
abilities (for an overview see: Schwarzer, 2014). For instance, fine motor skills are related to visual
prediction abilities in 7-month-old infants (Kubicek, Jovanovic, & Schwarzer, 2017). However,
predictive reaching for a moving object seems to be more difficult than just looking at the correct
location (e.g. van der Meer, van der Weel, & Lee, 1994). The goal of the present study was to
investigate whether manual exploration skills are related to the ability to predictively grasp for
moving and partly occluded objects. Our sample consisted of 34 9-month-old infants. One task was
designed to test infants’ manual exploration skills. In the second task, the infants were required to
reach for and grasp temporarily covered targets attached to an object that was moving 90 ° around
its horizontal axis. We recorded infants’ grasping movements with a video camera and a Vicon
motion capture system. Our results indicate a relationship between the extent to which infants were
able to grasp predictively and their frequency of one specific manual exploration procedure
(fingering).

85

Contributions

Visual preference for real objects over pictures is related to 7-monthold infants’ manual object exploration
Theresa M Gerhard1, Jody C Culham2 & Gudrun Schwarzer1

Justus-Liebig-University, Developmental Psychology; 2University of Western Ontario, Department of Psychology and
Brain and Mind Institute
theresa.gerhard@psychol.uni-giessen.de
1

Previous research showed that infants prefer to look at real objects over corresponding pictures when
presented with them simultaneously (e.g., Gerhard, Culham, & Schwarzer, 2016). Furthermore,
sophisticated manual exploration skills such as fingering, rotating, and transferring objects were
found to foster infants’ understanding about the three-dimensional nature of objects (Soska, Adolph,
& Johnson, 2010). Therefore, it was the primary goal of the present study to examine whether 7month-old infants’ visual preference for real objects and corresponding pictures is related to their
manual object exploration behavior. By using a preferential looking paradigm, we presented 59 7month-old infants with a real toy next to its picture version. All of the infants also participated in a
manual object exploration task. Results showed a preference for real objects that was dependent on
infants’ manual object exploration. Infants with a high score in fingerings preferred to look at the
real objects, whereas infants with a low score in fingerings showed no preferences. Our findings
replicate previous work on a preference for real objects over pictures in infants (Gerhard et al.,
2016). Moreover, they suggest that experience with specific exploratory actions might improve
infants’ understanding of the differences in form regarding real objects and pictures.

Social influence can lead to a persistent perceptual bias
Markus Germar

University of Hildesheim, Institute of Psychology
germar@uni-hildesheim.de

Since the classic studies by Sherif (1935), Asch (1956), and Moscovici and Personnaz (1980), one
of the most fundamental questions in social psychology is whether social influence can alter basic
perceptual processes. Recent research shows that social influence can indeed induce a perceptual
bias. More precisely, these studies demonstrate that others’ decisions about a stimulus can alter the
uptake of available sensory information (Germar, Schlemmer, Krug, Voss, & Mojzisch, 2014;
Germar, Albrecht, Voss, & Mojzisch, 2016). However, it remains unclear whether social influence
can have a lasting effect on perceptual decision-making, thus, whether the perceptual bias persists
after being exposed to social influence. To address this issue, we conducted two experiments (N =
160) in which participants completed a perceptual task split in two phases. In the first phase, they
received feedback about other participants’ decisions. In the second phase, they completed the task
alone. We conducted a diffusion model analysis (Ratcliff, 1978) of the reaction time data of the
second phase in order to disentangle whether social influence leads to a persistent perceptual
and/or judgmental bias. Our findings consistently show that social influence can lead to a lasting
change in perceptual decision-making due to a persistent perceptual bias.

86

Contributions

From hammers to numbers: The role of experience and expertise in
shaping concrete and abstract concepts
Marta Virginia Ghio & Christian Bellebaum

Heinrich-Heine University, Institute of Experimental Psychology
marta.ghio@hhu.de

According to grounded theories of semantic memory, the involvement of distributed networks
including modality-specific brain systems (e.g., sensory-motor, emotional) in conceptual processing
reflects the type of experiential information that is relevant during concept acquisition. Direct
evidence of the role of experience in shaping conceptual representations, however, is still sparse,
especially for abstract concepts. An experimental approach to address experience dependence for
concrete concepts is to test in healthy participants whether the type of experience (action vs. visual)
during concept acquisition or the degree of action expertise affects the semantic processing of words
referring to tools (e.g., hammer) or actions (e.g., to grasp). To this purpose, we developed trainingbased paradigms, which allowed to experimentally control the individual experience and familiarity
with either novel objects or specific actions and action concepts. We applied these paradigms in a
series of studies employing electroencephalography, (functional) magnetic resonance imaging and
voxel based morphometry. In addition, we extend previous research on the effects of individual
experience on conceptual processing to the abstract domain by focusing on mathematical concepts
(e.g., arithmetic). Preliminary findings suggest that the level of expertise (experts vs. novices) with
mathematical concepts specifically affects the processing of mathematical compared to other abstract
words.

Intimate co-representation for action regulation: Retrieval of
observationally acquired stimulus-response bindings in romantically
involved interaction partners versus strangers
Carina Giesen1, Virginia Löhl2 & Nicolas Koranyi2

Department of Psychology, General Psychology II, Friedrich Schiller University Jena; 2Friedrich Schiller University
Jena
carina.giesen@uni-jena.de
1

Social dependence in a task modulates binding and retrieval of stimuli and observed responses
(Giesen, Herrmann & Rothermund, 2014): Stimulus-based retrieval of observed responses occurred
only if the task required pairs to work cooperatively or competitively, but not if pairs worked
independently. The present study investigated retrieval of observational SR bindings in romantically
involved couples versus pairs of strangers. We assumed that romantically involved individuals would
more closely represent their own and their partner’s actions and would do so irrespective of task
requirements. A sequential prime-probe design was shared between two co-actors who took the roles
of actor and observer in turns. Stimulus relation and compatibility between observed (prime) and tobe-performed (probe) responses were varied orthogonally within participants. All participants were
in a romantic relationship; half of all pairs performed the task with their romantic partner, the rest
worked with a stranger. As expected, stimulus-based retrieval of observationally acquired SRbindings occurred only in romantically involved pairs; prime observers interacting with a stranger
showed no retrieval effects. We conclude that mental representations of self and other are more
closely intertwined in romantic couples, which produces automatic action co-representation effects
even if co-representation is not required by the task itself.

87

Contributions

Utility dependent processing of distractor information and reduction of
distractor interference over time
Imke Marilla Gillich1, Mike Wendt2 & Thomas Jacobsen1

Helmut Schmidt University/University of the Federal Armed Forces Hamburg; 2Medical School Hamburg
gillichi@hsu-hh.de
1

Interference evoked by a distractor presented in advance of the target is reduced when the distractortarget SOA is increased, suggesting timing-related inhibition of distractor-related activation. In
addition, distractor processing is assumed to be (strategically) adjusted to the proportions of
congruent and incongruent target-distractor combinations. To explore the interplay of proportion
congruency-based adjustment and the time course of distractor-related activation, we varied the
proportions of congruent and incongruent trials as well as the distractor-target SOA. To control for a
confound due to item-specific priming, we kept distractor-related contingencies constant for a subset
of the stimuli, and used a different subset to bias the proportions of congruent and incongruent trials.
Distractor interference was larger, for both sets of stimuli, when proportion of congruent trials was
high, dismissing accounts of item-specific priming, and reduced when the SOA was long, showing
no evidence for maintenance of distractor-related activation under conditions of strategic distractor
usage.

Visuospatial attention shifts during mental arithmetic can be
measured via a temporal order judgment task
Maria Glaser & André Knops

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Psychology
maria.glaser@hu-berlin.de

Previous research has revealed a strong relationship between numbers and space. In the context of
arithmetic processing, it has been shown that solving addition problems shifts attention to the right
and solving subtraction problems shifts attention to the left. However, it is still unclear at what point
during the arithmetic process these spatial attention shifts occur. To address this question, the present
study made use of a temporal order judgement task (TOJ) where participants needed to decide
which of two lateralized stimuli was presented first. The experiment was made of two blocks: a
baseline TOJ block and an arithmetic TOJ block. In the second block participants were presented
with two-digit addition and subtraction problems via headphones. After a varying delay (500, 1000
& 1500 ms) participants performed the TOJ task and then reported the result of the arithmetic task
presented beforehand. Consistent with previous findings, addition/subtraction tasks induced
attentional shifts to the right/left. More importantly, the results indicated that these shifts become
more likely after larger delays. This suggests that visuospatial attention mechanisms are recruited
during mental arithmetic, especially during the advanced calculation stages, and that mental
arithmetic is performed on a numerical representation that is spatially oriented.

88

Contributions

Moderators of lateral attitude change
Tina Glaser, Katrin Pum, Roman Linne, Lea Elleringmann & Gerd Bohner
University of Bielefeld, Department of Psychology
tina.glaser@uni-bielefeld.de

In two studies, we tested basic assumptions of the lateral attitude change (LAC) model (Glaser et al.,
2015) in which generalization describes a change in evaluation in a focal object and in lateral
objects, whereas displacement describes explicit attitude change only on lateral but not on focal
objects. In Study 1, we found that valenced information about products did not only lead to attitude
change toward the focal product but also generalized to similar (= lateral) products on explicit as
well as implicit measures. Discrediting the product information resulted in a smaller explicit focal
change but did not influence implicit evaluations. Additionally, Study 1 revealed that generalization
is a linear function of strength of association between focal and lateral stimuli. In Study 2, we used
only explicit measures and additionally manipulated preference for consistency. We replicated focal
attitude change and generalization effects. Moreover, in the condition where product information
was discredited, a displacement effect emerged for one of the products. Preference for consistency
did not significantly moderate the LAC effects; however, a descriptive trend showed that high (vs.
low) preference for consistency led to stronger explicit generalization effects.

Perceptual reliability in the scotopic foveal scotoma
Alejandro Hernán Gloriani & Alexander C Schütz

Philipps-University Marburg, Psychology Department-Sensomotoric learning
alejandro.gloriani@staff.uni-marburg.de

In order to optimize their responses, humans need assess the received sensory information.
Sometimes, however, percepts are inferred only from the context and therefore intrinsically uncertain.
Here we investigate if percepts in the scotopic foveal scotoma could be biased by a surrounding
stimulus and the integration of the information across saccades in this condition of low luminance.
Striped stimuli either vertical or horizontal were presented in a presaccadic peripheral, postsaccadic
foveal and trans-saccadic integration discrimination task. In order to perform the stimulation, we used
a striped annulus concentric with a striped inner circle. In some trials only the inner circle was
presented, and in those trials in which both stimuli were presented simultaneously, the striped
patterns could be either parallel or orthogonal. Participants always judged the orientation of the
inner circle. We calculated the d-primes and bias values for the different stimulation conditions and
we found that the perception in the foveal scotoma is clearly biased for the surround. Furthermore,
we found that the performance during the trans-saccadic discrimination task is better than the
performances for the other conditions, suggesting the integration of peripheral and foveal
information even in the scotopic range, in which cone photoreceptors are not active.

89

Contributions

Leave-One-Trial-Out (LOTO): A very simple and very general method
to capture trial-by-trial variability in cognitive model parameters
Sebastian Gluth & Nachshon Meiran

University of Basel, Department of Psychology
sebastian.gluth@unibas.ch

The remarkable success of model-based cognitive neuroscience in recent years has been
accompanied by an increased interest in understanding trial-by-trial fluctuations of parameters of
cognitive models (for relating these fluctuations to brain activity). Yet, previous attempts of capturing
parameter variability were limited by being restricted to specific models, by being difficult to
implement, or by requiring a high amount of computation time. We propose a simple, efficient and
general approach to estimating trial-wise changes in latent variables: Leave-One-Trial-Out (LOTO).
The basic principle of LOTO is to estimate parameter values for the complete dataset and for the
dataset with a specific trial being omitted. The difference in the estimates is then a reflection of the
parameter value in the omitted trial. This method is superior to estimating parameter values from
single trials directly, and faster than our previously developed Bayesian approach. We will
demonstrate the generality of LOTO by applying it to different cognitive models using both choice
and response time data. Altogether, LOTO has the potential to promote research on tracking
changes in cognitive model parameters and linking these changes to neuroscientific measures.

Prediction in the oculomotor system
Alexander Goettker1, Doris I Braun2, Alexander C Schütz3 & Karl R Gegenfurtner2

Justus-Liebig University, Experimental Psychology; 2Justus-Liebig University Giessen, Experimental Psychology;
Philipps-University Marburg, Sensomotoric learning
Alexander.Goettker@psychol.uni-giessen.de

1
3

Due to the foveal organization of our visual system we have to constantly move our eyes to gain
precise information about our environment. However, doing so massively alters the retinal input. This
is problematic for the perception of moving objects, because physical motion and retinal motion
become decoupled and the brain has to discount for the eye movements to recover the speed of
moving objects. Thus, during following of moving objects the role of prediction is twofold. First, due
the internal processing delays there is the need for continuous predictions about future locations of
the target to enable the oculomotor system to keep track of it. Second, predictions have to be made
about the effect of ongoing eye movements on the retinal input, in order to reconstruct the actual
state of the environment. To tap into those questions we investigated how different target movements
affect the oculomotor behavior and how different oculomotor behavior affects the perceived speed of
a target. We found that our eye movements, saccades and smooth pursuit, are influenced and react
to the position and the speed of moving target and that differences in oculomotor behavior,
especially the use of corrective saccades, can affect perceived speed.

90

Contributions

Bewahrt das Linksabbiegen an T-Kreuzungen den Pkw-Fahrer vor
Kollisionen mit querenden Radfahrern von rechts? Eine
sicherheitskritische Bewertung des Blick- und Annäherungsverhaltens
von rechts- und linksabbiegenden Pkw-Fahrern
Irene Gohl

Universität der Bundeswehr München, Institut für Arbeitswissenschaft
extern.irene.gohl@audi.de

Die Betrachtung des Unfallgeschehens an T-Kreuzungen zwischen einem einbiegenden Fahrzeug und
einem von rechts auf dem Radweg querenden Radfahrer zeigt, dass rechtsabbiegende Pkw-Fahrer
häufiger mit Radfahrern von rechts kollidieren als linksabbiegende Pkw-Fahrer. Frühere
Untersuchungen zeigten, dass rechts- und linksabbiegende Pkw-Fahrer ein räumlich unterschiedliches
Blickverhalten aufweisen. Da die Pkw-Fahrer bis zu einem bestimmten Zeitpunkt auch auf kurzfristige
Änderungen in der Peripherie noch rechtzeitig reagieren können, kann das Blickverhalten beim
Rechtsabbiegen nicht per se als sicherheitskritischer für Radfahrer von rechts erachtet werden als
beim Linksabbiegen. Entscheidend für die Bewertung eines sicherheitskritischen Verhaltens ist
vielmehr wie gut die mentale Repräsentation der Umwelt unmittelbar vor diesem Zeitpunkt mit der
aktuellen Situation übereinstimmt. Aus diesem Grund wurde eine Fahrversuchsstudie mit 48
Probanden im realen Straßenverkehr durchgeführt. Da die Güte des mentalen Abbildes einerseits
durch das Blickverhalten und andererseits durch das nutzbare Sichtfeld des Verkehrsraumes
beeinflusst wird, wurde das Fahrerverhalten an vier T-Kreuzungen mit unterschiedlichen
Einsehbarkeiten untersucht. Die Ergebnisse zeigen, dass rechts- und linksabbiegende Pkw-Fahrer ein
ähnlich hohes Risiko in Kauf nehmen nicht mehr rechtzeitig auf eine kurzfristige Änderung der
Situation reagieren zu können. Ferner unterscheidet sich das Blickverhalten unmittelbar vor dem
letztmöglichen Eingriffszeitpunkt nicht signifikant in Abhängigkeit des Abbiegemanövers und/oder
der Einsehbarkeit.

I spy with my little eye: About features that capture the attention of
Korean speakers but not of German speakers
Florian Goller1, Soonja Choi2 & Ulrich Ansorge1

University of Vienna, Department of Basic Psychological Research and Research Methods; 2San Diego State
University, Department of Linguistics and Asian/Middle-Eastern Languages; University of Vienna, Faculty of
Philological and Cultural Studies
florian.goller@univie.ac.at

1

We present an experimental paradigm that provides an excellent method to answer not only whether
language influences our perception and cognition, but also how deeply it can influence them. We
tested native speakers of Korean and German, two languages that semantically categorize spatial
relations in fundamentally different ways: German (similar to English) categorizes spatial relations
based on containment (in) and support (auf), whereas Korean categorizes by – and thus semantically
distinguish between - tight-fit (kkita) vs. loose-fit (nehta, nohta). Using a visual search paradigm, we
tested whether the language that participants speak makes them more or less sensitive to such
features of visual stimuli. We let Korean and German speakers search for a predefined colour target
among distractors. Unbeknownst to the participants, targets were also implicitly signalled by features
of a different sematic domain, i.e. spatial relations of tight-fit or loose-fit. We found that only Koreans
spontaneously picked up on this implicit feature of spatial fitness and used it to aid their search for
colour. As these spatial concepts are not grammticalised in the German language, our results
demonstrate that there is an influence of language-specific semantics of the native language on very
basic processes of visual attention.

91

Contributions

Predicting value-based decisions using a memory model
Tamara Gomilsek, Wolfgang Gaissmaier & Janina Anna Hoffmann
University of Konstanz, Department for Psychology
tamara.gomilsek@uni-konstanz.de

Value-based decisions are mostly portrayed as a weighing of attributes, although daily decisions,
such as evaluating food, may often entail an associative retrieval of prior judgments. Indeed, prior
work suggests that factors strengthening or inhibiting retrieval of previous judgments, such as the
frequency of exposure, systematically affect value-based decisions. The current work aims to predict
value-based decisions with a memory model that bases value-based choices solely on the similarity
of the current probe to previously seen exemplars. A simulation study showed that people should
prefer more frequent items to less frequent items and items with higher values to items with lower
values. Importantly, the memory model proposes that people should more strongly prefer frequently
presented items that have higher values. We test these predictions in an experiment that varies the
frequency of presented items and their item values in the learning stage. In the subsequent decision
phase, participants had to repeatedly choose between two items with reward depending completely
on their choices. As predicted in the simulation study, first results of an experiment show that people
really do prefer frequent items with higher values in comparison to less frequent items with lower
values.

Drifting through the Noise – A diffusion model analysis of the
interplay between processing and storage in working memory
Jan Göttmann, Alexander Kipnis, Gidon T. Frischkorn & Anna-Lena Schubert
Ruprecht-Karls Universität, Institute of Psychology
j.goettmann@stud.uni-heidelberg.de

This study examined the interrelations between processing and storage in working memory. We
developed an experimental design in which the updating process of the central executive can be
manipulated separately from memory load. Further, we explored which parameter of the Ratcliff
Diffusion Model captures the effects of updating and memory load on working memory performance
best. The results showed main and interaction effects of memory set size and updating on both
accuracy (Acc) and reaction time (RT) during memory retrieval. To test whether the effects on RT and
Acc were related to differences in the drift parameter v, we compared different specifications of the
Ratcliff Diffusion Model. Overall, the model which only varied the drift rate over experimental
conditions explained the empirical data best and most parsimoniously. Additionally, an out of
sample prediction from half of the data was conducted to further validate the model selection. We
thus conclude that drift rate may be interpreted as an indicator for the signal to noise ratio in
working memory and is a valid predictor for working memory performance. Furthermore, the results
indicate that memory load and updating access a common cognitive resource in working memory.

92

Contributions

Effects of vertical head orientation on spatial attention
Felix J. Götz, Anne Böckler, Paul M. Heineck & Andreas B. Eder
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Department of Psychology
goetzfj@gmail.com

Social cognition research showed that another person’s gaze direction and/or head orientation can
cause shifts of visual spatial attention. The present studies aimed at disentangling gaze and head
orientation. Specifically, portrait-like photographs from a frontal view with gaze directed at the
camera but head tilted up vs. down (vs. not tilted) were used as facial cue stimuli. In all three
experiments, participants had to identify vertically presented shapes (circle or square) that followed
facial cue stimuli. We hypothesized that target identification is faster if direction of head tilt and
target location correspond. In Experiment 1, static photographs of heads tilted up vs. down affected
identification times according to our hypothesis. In Experiment 2, photographs with heads not tilted
preceded photographs with tilted heads to simulate a dynamic head movement. Again, identification
times were affected in line with our hypothesis. In Experiment 3, photographs with heads not tilted
followed photographs with tilted heads. Interestingly, in this final experiment, identification times
were slower when direction of tilted head and target location corresponded. Implications are
discussed.

Rejecting regularity: Giving up pattern search in number sequences—
individual differences and tentative processes
Nico Gradwohl1 & Hansjörg Neth2

University of Konstanz, Graduate School of Decision Sciences, Psychology; 2University of Konstanz, Social
Psychology and Decision Sciences
nico.gradwohl@uni-konstanz.de

1

People are motivated and proficient concerning the detection of patterns in their environment.
However, giving up searching for patterns is equally important for saving limited resources and
avoiding false predictions. We investigate influences on giving up searching for regularity within a
framework of ecological rationality, which considers characteristics of the individual and the
environment to evaluate a strategy. We assume that both types of characteristics jointly influence the
choice of strategies and subsequent classifications of number sequences. In an online experiment,
participants classified different types of number sequences as either regular or irregular. Their
classifications were analyzed in a signal detection framework. Judgments did not systematically
differ between environments that selectively rewarded the detection of regular versus irregular
sequences. Concerning individual differences, higher levels of objective numeracy were related to
fewer false alarms. Moreover, higher levels of paranormal beliefs and conspiracy mentality
corresponded to more false alarms. Finally, rejecting regularity took longer for difficult sequences
that appeared to be regular at first sight, suggesting that the perceived probability of detecting
regularity plays a role. Implications for the dynamics of the decision of giving up the search for
regularity are discussed.

93

Contributions

Design Factors (II): How Details of the Mouse Tracking Procedure
Influence Action Dynamics in Cognitive and Value-Based Decision
Paradigms
Tobias Grage1, Martin Schoemann1, Pascal J. Kieslich2 & Stefan Scherbaum1

Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Psychology; 2University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology
tobias.grage@tu-dresden.de
1

The continuity of mind leaks into the continuity of movements. This is the core assumption underlying
mouse-tracking as a method to trace cognitive processes. Given this assumption it is an important
question whether the assumed interaction between mind and movement might be influenced by the
measurement itself, that is, the methodological setup of mouse-tracking. Hence, we conducted two
mouse-tracking studies (N = 40 each) in which we systematically investigated the influence of design
factors on the quality of mouse-tracking measures. In a Simon task, we varied the mouse cursor
speed and the response box location. In a classical intertemporal choice task, we varied the
information complexity and the stimuli location. Additionally, in both studies we varied the starting
procedure and the response procedure. Our results suggest that design factors influence the
interaction between mind and movement and therefore have impact on mouse-tracking measures and
the validity of the method itself.

Mobile Brain/Body Imaging in Neuroergonomics
Klaus Gramann

Biological Psychology and Neuroergonomics, TU Berlin
klaus.gramann@tu-berlin.de

Over the last two decades, technologies for investigating brain and behavior at work have
advanced significantly providing mobile EEG and NIRS hardware to be synchronized with motion
capture and other data streams to record human brain activity and behavior in applied work
settings. New analyses methods are now available that allow for joint analyses of multi-modal data
including behavior and brain dynamics of actively behaving humans. This kind of approach is
relevant for neuroergonomics as it allows for a better understanding of the behavioral and neural
requirements of working environments that require active physical interaction with often dynamically
changing technical systems. The impact of motor planning and motor execution on cognition and
brain dynamics, however is only purely understood. Mobile Brain/Body Imaging (MoBI) provides the
methodological basis to overcome the restrictions of traditional neuroimaging modalities and to gain
new insights into the complex interplay of cognition, active behavior and brain activity in mobile
humans. It thus allows new insights not only into the brain at work but also allows improvement of
working environments by providing user information that otherwise is only difficult to assess.

94

Contributions

Persistence of perception-action interaction over time and
proprioceptive interference
Maryvonne Granowski, Oliver Simon Sack & Christine Sutter

German Police University, Institute of Traffic Science & Traffic Psychology
m.granowski@web.de

In line with the theory of event coding (Hommel et al., 2001), Ladwig, Sutter and Müsseler (2012,
2013) showed in a n motor replication task that perceived visual and proprioceptive information
interacts with action execution (cross talk). We further analyzed the persistence of cross talk within
and between event files in a n-1 motor replication task with and without visual feedback. In the
present experiment, we introduce a n motor replication task with a temporally delay between phase
1 and phase 2 to investigate the temporal persistence and the persistence to intermediate
proprioceptive noise. Summing up, both results showed an assimilation (contrast) effect when
analyzing cross talk within (between) event files and we ascertained that the pattern resulted only
from characteristics of the motor system. Furthermore, we extend the view of resistant assimilation
from visual information in motor replications irrespective of intermediate proprioceptive noise.

Pupil Dilation as an Indicator of Selection-Decision
Lukas Greiter, Christoph Strauch & Anke Huckauf
Ulm University, Department of General Psychology
lukas.greiter@uni-ulm.de

Pupil diameter is a popular peripheral indicator of psychological activation in a broad variety of
contexts. More specifically, recent studies have shown that decisions and their outcomes are
reflected in and can be predicted by means of pupil size. However, studies either involved visual
target detection tasks, in which no corresponding distractor stimuli were provided, or decisions were
always confounded with a motor response (button press). Using a selection task, we compared pupil
responses to target and distractor stimuli employing a Go/NoGo-instruction. A total of 30 subjects
performed the letter selection task. By applying a gaze-based spelling paradigm, subjects had to
either select or reject letters that, correspondingly, either matched (targets) or mismatched
(distractors) a word displayed on the screen. A Go/NoGo procedure was used to signal whether to
respond manually via button press or not. Significant larger pupil dilations were obtained for targets
compared to distractors, for both, the Go- and the NoGo-condition. We conclude that a decision in
favor of selecting a target can be distinguished from a decision against selection, and this distinction
is not dependent on a motor response.

95

Contributions

The motor system’s role in understanding and prediction
Luigi Grisoni & Friedemann Pulvermüller

Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Philosophy and Humanities, Brain Language Laboratory
grisoniluigi@zedat.fu-berlin.de

A classic framework views perceptual systems as filters channeling input information to higher
centers, which fabricate cognition; the cognitive modules, in turn, use motor systems as slaves to
move the body. However, more recent evidence suggests that motor mechanisms take a role in
cognition. In this talk, we present evidence supporting a shared contribution of motor, sensory and
multimodal areas of cortex to different cognitive processes. Current neuroscience data support a
functional role of motor areas in language understanding and verbal working memory. When
understanding concrete action-related words such as “grasp” or abstract symbols related to inner
states, such as “love”, human subjects activate their motor system. These activations involve specific
subsections of the motor system, depending on the words’ meanings. Crucially, sensorimotor system
activity may even emerge before meaningful stimuli are perceived, thus reflecting semantic
predictions the subject generates based on information from the context. These findings – that motor
systems reflect specific content in semantic understanding and prediction – argue against classic
modular models. More likely, distributed neuronal circuits in which motor neurons play a key part
are the carriers of these higher cognitive functions.

Singleton search is a top-down strategy
Markus Grüner, Florian Goller & Ulrich Ansorge

University of Vienna, Department of Basic Psychological Research and Research Methods
markus.gruener@univie.ac.at

During singleton search, in each trial, participants are presented with a single target that stands out
by one feature among more feature-homogeneous non-singleton distractors. Researchers have
argued that singleton search is a top-down strategy. Accordingly, only cues matching the top-down
search template should capture attention. Here, we tested the top-down theory. We investigated if,
during the search for a color-singleton target of a known color, only color-singleton cues captured
attention. All our cues had the same color as the target and were presented at target location or
away from the target. All cues were on average uninformative of the target location. In line with the
top-down theory, only singleton cues captured attention, with faster search times in valid than invalid
conditions (validity effect). In contrast, double cues consisting of one cue at the target position and
one cue away from the target (valid condition) or of two cues presented away from the target
(invalid condition) created no validity effect.

96

Contributions

Can we identify faking strategies in lie detection? A Diffusion Model
Analysis of the Concealed Information Test
Bartosz Gula, Lars Reich, Gáspár Lukács & Rainer Alexandrowicz
University of Klagenfurt, Department of Psychology
bartosz.gula@aau.at

Lie detection paradigms, such as the reaction time-based Concealed Information Test (RT-CIT) are
prone to faking (e.g. Suchotzky et al., 2017). Trained and informed fakers can efficiently reduce the
difference in mean response times between irrelevant and probe items, leading to a classification
accuracy of the guilt status at chance level. In the present studies, we addressed two main questions:
(1) how well can the Drift Diffusion Model (DDM) explain the performance of guilty and innocent
participants, and (2), can we use the DDM to describe and identify faking strategies. We expected
that even in the case of equal mean RTs for irrelevant and probe items, faking strategies may be
manifest in higher moments of the RT distributions. Based on published RT-CIT data (Verschuere &
Kleinberg, 2015), we first show that for guilty participants drift rates differ between the two item
types, and, their starting point z is more biased than that of innocent participants. Second, we report
a mock crime study (N = 60) with three groups: innocent, guilty and guilty participants trained to
speed up on probe items. The results will be discussed in terms of the DDM’s propensity to identify
faking strategies.

Is the head-fake effect in basketball robust against practice?
Iris Güldenpenning1, Christoph Schütz2, Matthias Weigelt1 & Wilfried Kunde3

University of Paderborn, Psychology and Movement Science; 2Bielefeld University, Department of Sport Science;
Würzburg University, Department of Psychology
iris.gueldenpenning@uni-paderborn.de
1
3

We investigate whether extensive practice reduces the head-fake effect in basketball. Twenty
participants performed 2080 trials within five successive days and were asked to classify video
scenes of a basketball player either directly passing to the left/ride side or passing while gazing to
the opposite direction. The analysis of the mean reaction times showed that the head-fake effect was
significantly reduced from 44 ms at Day 1 to 36 ms at Day 5. Also, the reaction time frequency
distribution of each participant was fitted to an ex-Gaussian distribution using a MATLAB routine.
The analysis of the paramteres mu, sigma, and tau revealed that the head-fake effect was only
present in the Gaussian part of the distribution (mu and sigma). An additional examinination of the
ex-Gaussian distribution indicated that the head-fake effect results from a mixture of some slowed
trials with some unslowed ones (mixture effect) in 25% of the participants, whereas the other
participants showed a uniform slowing of all responses (uniform effect). Together, extensive practice
with the task is sufficient to reduce the head-fake effect in basketball. This effect of practice might be
reached with individually different processing strategies.

97

Contributions

Speaking the part: Psychological correlates and efficacy of voluntary
socio-emotional trait expression in voices
Stella Guldner1, Carolyn McGettigan2, Frauke Nees3 & Herta Flor3

University of Heidelberg, Central Institute of Mental Health, Institute of Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience; Royal
Holloway University of London, Vocal Communication Lab; University of Mannheim, Graduate School of Economic
and Social Sciences; 2Royal Holloway University of London, Vocal Communication Lab; 3University of Heidelberg,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Institute of Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience
stella.guldner@zi-mannheim.de
1

The voice is a central social behaviour, but little is known of how it is used to navigate social
interactions and achieve beneficial outcomes for the speaker. It has previously been shown that the
voice can be voluntarily modulated to convey personality traits. A lack of adequate vocal modulation
has been shown in people with deficits in social reactivity. In this study, we specifically investigated
the relationship between social reactivity and successful conveyance of social information in the
voice. 40 healthy adult participants took part in a vocal modulation task, in which they expressed
socio-emotional traits (e.g. hostility, likeability) in their voice. To obtain efficacy estimates, the
recordings were presented to naïve listeners for rating. Speakers’ social reactivity was measured
using self-report questionnaires. Voluntary expression of social traits in the voice is possible and
effective, reflected in significantly higher perceptual ratings of the expressed trait compared to all
other scales. Principal component analysis showed that socio-emotional traits are clustered on an
affiliation dimension spanning from approach (likability) to avoidance (hostility). Moreover,
individual voice modulation performance indices are significantly associated with speaker’s levels of
perspective taking. These findings advance our understanding of the significance of vocal behaviour
for socio-emotional communication.

Movement (Re-)planning Interferes with Working Memory during the
Maintenance Process: An ERP Study
Rumeysa Gunduz Can, Dirk Koester & Thomas Schack
Bielefeld University, CITEC
ruemeysa.guenduez@uni-bielefeld.de

The present study focuses on the neurophysiological interactions of manual actions with cognition.
Particularly, we investigated neuro-cognitive costs of implementing a new movement plan for
separate working memory (WM) domains (verbal, visuospatial) and processes (encoding,
maintenance, retrieval). In a dual-task paradigm, 36 participants concurrently performed a WM task
and grasp-to-place task (grasping a sphere to subsequently place it onto a target). For 30% of trials,
ongoing movement was re-planned. This study employed a 2 (WM Task: Verbal, visuospatial) x 2
(Planning: Prepared, re-planned) within-subject design. Event-related potentials (ERPs) were analyzed
separately for encoding, maintenance, retrieval processes. Behavioral analyses showed that memory
performance decreased for both WM tasks when movement re-planning was required, i.e., domaingeneral re-planning interference in WM. ERP analyses showed only for the maintenance process that
prepared trials elicited larger negative slow waves compared to re-planned trials regardless of WM
task. That is, maintenance-related ERPs of verbal and visuospatial tasks were equally affected.
Therefore, ERP findings support the domain-general re-planning interference. More importantly, for
the first time, ERP findings show the process-specific (maintenance) re-planning interference at the
neurophysiological level. In conclusion, the present study contributes to a better understanding of
neuro-cognitive mechanisms of manual action flexibility.

98

Contributions

The influence of competence expectations on nonverbal behavior of
learners
Marcel Hackbart & Barbara Thies

Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institute of Educational Psychology
m.hackbart@tu-braunschweig.de

Competence expectations influence the teacher-student-interaction and can be self-fulfilling. Main
focus of research in this area are the expectations held by teachers. However, students’ expectations
are also crucial regarding teacher-student-interaction (Nickel, 1985). To identify how student
expectations influence teachers, the influence of expectations on students’ behavior needs to be
explored. Therefore, the aim of the presented study is to investigate, whether competence
expectations of learners affect their behavior. Participants (N=62) were invited under a cover story
to a laboratory investigation. They believed the study was about teacher supervision. At the
beginning, the participants read a certificate about the teacher (either a good or a bad one), then
they saw a lecture by the supposed male or female teacher (video recording that was claimed to be
a live broadcast). During the lecture, the participants were filmed. Nonverbal behavior of the
participants was analyzed (e.g. forward lean, eye contact). Results revealed that participants who
expected a competent teacher had less eye contact and supported their heads for a shorter period of
time than participants who expected an incompetent teacher. There was no effect for sex of the
teacher on the nonverbal behavior.

Attention blinks irrespective of (lavender or peppermint) odor
Ryan Hackländer, Pamela Baess, Clara Hellweg & Christina Bermeitinger

University of Hildesheim, Cognitive Psychology
hacklaen@uni-hildesheim.de

A recent study (Colzato et al., 2014) provided evidence that ambient odors influence temporal
allocation of attention in an attentional blink paradigm. In two experiments, the authors reported
larger AB effects when subjects performed the AB task in the presence of peppermint than lavender
odor. This pattern was explained by an odorant-related change in the focus of attention due to the
presence of an apparently stimulating vs. relaxing scent. As the odors in their study were presented
ambiently, the method of odor presentation, rather than a specified cognitive mechanism, could
influence the observed result pattern. The presence of a single odorant over a longer time period
might be functionally different than varying odorants on a trial-by-trial basis. Using an olfactometer
enabling a trial-wise modulation of the odor presentation, we conducted three experiments aimed at
further investigating the effects of the two odorants, as well as presentation method and exposure
duration. Across all three experiments, we failed to find evidence in support of the notion that the
attentional blink is increased or attenuated by the presence of specific odors. Our results will be
discussed in relation to previous research and in light of general research principles of aromacology.

99

Contributions

The effect of walking on human visual perception
Barbara Händel & Liyu Cao

University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology
liyu.cao@uni-wuerzburg.de

Our knowledge about human perception largely derives from laboratory research where participants
are required to sit still, keep fixation, avoid blinks etc. During natural behaviour (e.g. walking), we
know little about human perceptual performance and the underlying brain activity. We investigated
the effect of free walking on visual perception using EEG and behavioural responses. Data were
collected from 30 participants while standing still, walking slowly or with normal speed. Participants
performed a contrast detection task in a centrally presented flickering grating under 4 different levels
of surround contrast using video goggles. We show that the steady state visual evoked potentials
(SSVEP) from the central grating were modulated by level of surround contrast (surround suppression)
and walking speed, with decreasing SSVEP amplitudes for increasing walking speeds. Interestingly,
an interaction effect between walking speed and level of surround contrast on the SSVEP amplitude
indicates that the surround exerted more influence on the central flicking grating when participants
were walking compared to standing still. Behavioural data (detection rate/response time) showed
similar effects. Corroborating findings in the mouse model, our data suggest that surround
suppression is influenced by walking but might be different for peripheral compared to central visual
input.

Independent effects of eye and hand movements on visual working
memory
Nina Maria Hanning & Heiner Deubel

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Allgemeine und Experimentelle Psychologie
hanning.nina@gmail.com

Saccades and reaches have been shown to selectively interfere with visual working memory,
presumably due to the deployment of spatial attention to their action goals. Given the assumption of
independent attentional mechanisms for the selection of eye and hand targets, the question arises
whether the two effector systems also separately interact with visual working memory. To approach
this issue, we investigated memory performance in combined eye-hand movements. Participants
memorized several items and performed eye, hand, or combined eye-hand movements during the
maintenance interval. Subsequently, we tested working memory performance at motor goals and
action-irrelevant locations. We found that for single eye and single hand movements, working
memory performance was increased at the motor target compared to the action-irrelevant locations.
Remarkably, the same amount of benefit was found at both the eye and the hand target for
combined eye-hand movements – with no memory tradeoff between the two targets. We conclude
that both effector systems independently enhance visual working memory at their goal location. This
is in line with the assumption that eye and hand targets are selected by separate attentional
mechanisms.

100

Contributions

Collaborative Spatial Search within Walkable Virtual Environments –
the Influence of Global Reference Information
Maxine Hanrieder, Katja Kaiser, Adamantini Hatzipanayioti, Betty Mohler & Tobias Meilinger
Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Department of Human Cognition, Perception and Action
adamantini.chatzipanagioti@tuebingen.mpg.de

Collaborative spatial search is an important task, for example, when firefighters or rescue teams
search for victims within a building. In two experiments we examined the distinction between
individual and collaborative search and the influence of common reference information on these two
types of search. In Experiment 1, individuals and dyads were asked to walk through and fully cover
virtual city environments of varied complexity displayed on head mounted displays. We recorded
search time and missed locations. With increasing environmental size and resultant increasing
memory load participants missed more target locations. Dyads showed longer added trajectories
than individuals, but less self-overlap with their own trajectory (i.e., walking the same section multiple
times). This suggests that the between-trajectories-overlap between searchers was responsible for the
inefficient trajectories in collaborative search. In Experiment 2, we provided participants with a
compass to facilitate organization of their searches. However, results were similar to those of
Experiment 1. Mere orientation cues without a-priori environmental information seem insufficient to
divide the search task and improve search performance.

The semantic content of abstract concepts: A property listing study of
296 abstract words
Marcel Harpaintner

Ulm University, Department of Psychiatry
marcel.harpaintner@uni-ulm.de

The grounding of concepts in modality-specific systems is discussed controversially. Grounded
cognition theories propose that concepts are embodied in the sense that they are represented in
distinct modal brain areas depending on specific sensory and motor experiences during concept
acquisition. Accumulating evidence suggests that concrete concepts are indeed linked closely to
modality-specific systems, whereas the conceptual representation of abstract words is often seen as a
major counter-argument against embodied approaches. Here, we investigated the semantic content
of abstract concepts by using a property generation task. Participants were asked to write down
properties such as features, situations and associations coming into mind for 296 abstract concepts.
These properties were categorized by a coding-scheme making a classification into modality-specific
and verbal contents possible. As hypothesized, we found considerable percentages of generated
introspective, affective, social, sensory and motor-related properties, in addition to verbal
associations, revealing the heterogeneity of the abstract concept class. Although the present property
listing study does not formally allow to test competing theories of the representation of abstract
concepts, we argue that the presence of modal properties in participants’ listings constitutes an
important prerequisite for the validity of grounded cognition theories.

101

Contributions

Adaptive Control of Working Memory
Eva-Maria Hartmann, Stefanie Ochsenkühn, Marco Steinhauser & Miriam Gade
Katholische Universität Eichstätt Ingolstadt, General Psychology
eva-maria.hartmann@ku.de

The present study aimed at investigating the mechanisms of adaptive cognitive control in declarative
working memory (WM). According to the WM model by Oberauer (2009), declarative WM holds
available objects for current processing whereas procedural WM provides operations to be
performed on selected objects. The two systems have been shown to operate analogously in
selection processes. Adaptive control refers to the finding of flexible adjustments of current processes
in face of cognitive conflict. For instance, a higher frequency of incongruent stimuli, that is stimuli
evoking conflicting response tendencies leads to a higher level of cognitive control as reflected by
smaller congruency effects (i.e., the difference between congruent and incongruent items). To test for
the analogy of conflict adaptation in declarative WM, we used three different paradigms and
manipulated the frequency of congruent items probed across blocks. Participants memorized two lists
of four items (e.g., 2-5-7-1) and we constructed congruent items by linking the same position across
both lists to the same digits (e.g., second and fourth item in lists 2-5-7-1 and 3-5-8-1). In all three
experiments, the results replicated the classical frequency congruency effect, providing further
evidence for the assumed analogy of procedural and declarative WM.

Recovering Rasch Model Parameters when the True Latent Traits are
not Normally Distributed: Comparison of Bayesian and LikelihoodBased Approaches
Raphael Hartmann

Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Department of Psychology
raphael.hartmann@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

This simulation study compares the Rasch model parameter estimates of five different estimators when
the latent trait distribution is skewed; hierarchical Bayesian models with normal, skew normal, and
mixture normal ability priors, the conditional maximum likelihood, and the marginal maximum
likelihood estimator. We generate true latent traits from four skewed and one standard normal
distribution, and difficulty parameters from a standard normal distribution. The comparison of the
estimates is based on the mean squared error (MSE) and the bias for all latent trait conditions. We
also check whether sum score skewness values have an influence on the estimates. The Bayesian
model with the skew normal ability prior shows overall the best performance; its average MSE is
almost always among the two lowest as well within the latent trait conditions as within the sum score
skewness conditions. Its mean bias is not as consistently good, but still among the best in most
conditions. We strongly recommend to use it, but we also recommend to compare the ability
parameter estimates with the extremely high (> 2) and low (< -2) estimates of the MML since it
performs worse than the MML there, especially for low test lengths.

102

Contributions

Emotion-Induced Memory Modulation: Bimodal Integration and the
Effects of Inhibitory Control
Lisa Christina Hasenbein & Arianne Herrera-Bennett
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Psychology
lisa.hasenbein@campus.lmu.de

The functionalist framework (Farb et al., 2013) views emotion as a tool to shape attention and
perception, rather than limiting it to the affective component of experience. Accordingly, the present
study examines the interplay between emotion and cognition at the level of bottom-up processes,
namely when information is presented from two concurrent sources. While past research indicates
that individuals automatically combine audiovisual stimuli (i.e. facial and vocal expressivity) when
judging emotion, even when tasked to ignore audio stimuli (de Gelder & Vroomen, 2000; Dolan et
al., 2001), such studies do not account for the role of executive functions when evaluating effects on
accuracy and speed of emotion identification. Our study replicates the aforementioned bimodal
integration paradigm, taking inhibition-related functions (Friedman & Miyake, 2004) as potential
moderators, as well as measures of subsequent recall (faces and sentence content). Repeatedmeasures ANOVA results support past findings: congruency of emotion between modalities led to
quicker and more accurate identification, compared to incongruent/neutral trials. Effects of prosody
on perception are expected to be more pronounced in subjects with low inhibitory control.
Moreover, results speak to effects of integration on information retention, whereby greater inhibition
of peripheral content should be reflected in greater memory trade-offs.

Mousetrap: An R package to process, analyse, cluster, and visualize
hand- and mouse-trajectories
Jonas MB Haslbeck1, Dirk U Wulff2, Pascal J Kieslich3, Felix Henninger4 & Michael SchulteMecklenbeck5

University of Amsterdam; 2University of Basel; 3University of Mannheim; 4University of Koblenz-Landau; 5University of
Bern
dirk.wulff@gmail.com

1

Mouse- and hand-tracking tracking technologies are increasingly employed to shed light on the
cognitive processes underlying a diverse range of behaviour ranging from recognition memory to
social games. In this talk, I present the mousetrap package for the statistical programming language
R. This package can import mouse- and hand-tracking data from a variety of sources. It offers
functions for preprocessing, analysing, and visualizing mouse and hand movements, and calculates
a variety of established measures for curvature, complexity, velocity, and acceleration. In addition,
the package offers a number of options for advanced analyses, such as spatial clustering of
trajectories, the identification of different trajectory types, and the animation of trajectories. Using
this package, I will showcase what mouse- and hand-tracking can and cannot reveal about the
underlying cognitive process and discuss best practices. The mousetrap package is open-source and
freely available from http://pascalkieslich.github.io/mousetrap/.

103

Contributions

Alignment effects in spatial perspective taking from an external
vantage point
Adamantini Hatzipanayioti1 & Marios Avraamides2

Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics, Department of Human Cognition, Perception and Action; 2University
of Cyprus, Department of Psychology
adamantini.chatzipanagioti@tuebingen.mpg.de

1

Previous research suggests that reasoning about imagined perspectives within immersive
environments is difficult. In two experiments we examined the alignment effects (i.e., poor
performance as the difference between one’s actual and imagined perspective increases) when the
observer is external to the scene. Participants adopted imagined perspectives around a table and
pointed to the position of a target. In Experiment 1 the spatial scene was experienced either as
immediate in immersive virtual reality (VR) with participants located within the scene or as remote
presented on a virtual screen within VR. In Experiment 2 participants viewed the scene on a screen
in real world. Results showed that the size of the alignment effect was similar across environments in
Experiment 1, suggesting that viewing the scene as immediate or remote does not create additional
conflicts in perspective taking. However, when the scene was presented in the real world
(Experiment 2) the alignment effect was smaller compared to viewing the scene remotely in VR
(Experiment 1). Although one would expect that immersive scenes would yield a strong alignment
effect, in fact having visual access to body information which by default is lacking in VR, might be
an important factor for perspective taking.

Gamma band oscillations mediate comprehension of metaphoric cospeech gestures
Yifei He & Benjamin Straube

Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy
heyifei1984@gmail.com

Metaphoric gestures are used to communicate abstract information by referring to gestures that are
clearly concrete (e.g. raising a hand for ‘the presentation is on a high level’). Compared to linguistic
metaphor, the comprehension of metaphoric gesture has not been studied. In the current experiment,
we set out an EEG experiment investigating the comprehension of metaphoric (MP) vs. iconic (IC) cospeech gestures in different language contexts. German participants (n=20) viewed video clips with
an actor performing both types of gestures accompanied by either comprehensible German (G) or
incomprehensible Russian (R) speech, or speaking German sentences without any gestures (N). Timefrequency analysis of the EEG data showed that, MPG vs. ICG elicited parietally-distributed power
decrease in the gamma band (50-70Hz) between 500-700ms, and this effect was source-localized
to the right middle temporal gyrus. However, this MP-IC effect was reduced in the Russian language
(R) and no-gesture conditions (N). Additionally, item-based correlation analysis suggested that
gamma power correlates positively with concreteness ratings of the co-speech gestures. Our findings
showed the relevance of gamma-band oscillations to higher-order semantic processes during
comprehending metaphoric co-speech gestures (Lewis & Bastiaansen, 2015), especially with regard
to integrating concrete gestures to abstract speech.

104

Contributions

Extra-retinal and intersensory aspects of cybersickness
Heiko Hecht1, Behrang Keshavarz2 & Suzanne Nooij3

Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz; 2Toronto Rehabilitation Institute; 3Max-Planck Institut für Kybernetische
Biologie Tübingen
hecht@uni-mainz.de

1

Visually induced motion sickness (VIMS) is a common side-effect in virtual environments and
simulators. We hold that sea sickness and cyber sickness are of the same origin. In both cases, the
vestibular afferents and proprioceptive information disagree with the visual information about body
posture and movement. If one modality (or more) is in conflict with the physical movement of our
body, motion sickness ensues. We report a number of studies that we have conducted to investigate
how repeated exposure, complexity of the visual stimulus, odors, and music influence the genesis of
VIMS. Since the standard method to measure VIMS, via the Simulator Sickness Questionnaire, is
rather time-consuming, it does not lend itself to taking the repeated measures necessary to portray
the time-course of VIMS. We have validated a fast motion sickness scale (FMS) that is up to the job.
Our results qualify and refine the conflict theory of motion sickness – and may even challenge it. On
the one hand, basic visual parameters, such as brightness and contrast, were rather inconsequential
for the degree of VIMS. On the other hand, vection, stereopsis, and other extra-retinal factors, such
as music and odors, had substantial influence on the genesis of VIMS.

Jointly Modeling Mouse-Trajectories and Accuracies with Generalized
Processing Trees
Daniel W. Heck, Edgar Erdfelder & Pascal J. Kieslich

University of Mannheim
heck@uni-mannheim.de

To test psychological theories, the mouse-tracking methodology often focuses on the effect of
experimental manipulations on trajectory curvature. Many mouse-tracking studies involve tasks with
an objectively correct answer and exclude trials with incorrect answers from analysis. Moreover,
studies are typically limited to mean-level analyses of simple indicators of trajectory curvature (e.g.,
maximum deviation) and comparisons of these means between conditions. However, such analyses
ignore the accuracy of responses and cannot account for the bimodality often observed in mousetracking data on the trial level. As a remedy, we propose Generalized Processing Tree (GPT) models
as a flexible approach for the analysis of mouse-tracking data. Psychologically, GPT models assume
a finite number of latent cognitive processes to jointly account for both the response frequencies and
the curvature of the mouse trajectories. Statistically, GPT models assume finite mixture distributions
with weights determined by a processing-tree structure of conditional probability parameters, and
continuous component distributions such as Gaussians with separate or shared means across states.
We highlight theoretical and statistical benefits of GPT models for mouse-tracking data using
semantic categorization and related tasks as an example.

105

Contributions

How performance-contingent reward prospect modulates cognitive
control: Rigid usage and maintenance of predictive and non-predictive
contextual information
Carmen Hefer & Gesine Dreisbach

University of Regensburg
carmen.hefer@psychologie.uni-regensburg.de

Hefer and Dreisbach (2017) showed that the reward effect in terms of increased cognitive stability
comes at the cost of decreased flexibility: A reward group showed persistent cue-usage even when
cue-information changed from highly predictive to non-predictive. Aim of the present study was to
investigate whether reward-prospect (compared to no reward) also impairs the adaptation process
when the cue-information changes from non-predictive to highly predictive. To this end a modified
version of the AX-continuous performance task was used. In the first two experiments no answer to
this question could be found because the rewarded group showed signs of enhanced cue-usage
already for the non-predictive cues. In Experiment 3, where any misleading information was
removed, we found evidence that a change from non-predictive to predictive cues lead to increased
cue-usage in both, reward and neutral group. Results of the first two experiments thus demonstrate
that reward prospect leads participants to use any potentially relevant information, even at the
expense of higher errors. Results of Experiment 3 allow to answer the original question: Reward does
not prevent the adaptation from non-predictive to highly predictive cues.

Characterizing explicit and implicit contributions to visuomotor
adaptation
Mathias Hegele

Justus-Liebig University, Department of Psychology and Sport Science
mathias.hegele@sport.uni-giessen.de

Adaptation to novel visuomotor transformations is not a unitary process, but comprises explicit as
well as implicit knowledge that together contribute to overall adaptation. By implicit knowledge, I
refer to the development of an internal models that approximates the transformation and gives rise to
aftereffects. By explicit knowledge, I refer to conscious awareness of characteristics of the
transformation, which can serve as a basis for conscious and intentional strategic corrections of
otherwise spontaneously executed movements. An experimental paradigm is introduced with which
explicit and implicit components of adaptation can be dissociated by using a comprehensive set of
visual open-loop tests. In those tests, participants are explicitly informed about the presence/absence
of the transformation in order to obtain measures of aftereffects that is unconfounded by conscious
strategic corrections. In addition, a test of explicit knowledge is included in which explicit judgments
of the movement orientation believed to be appropriate to reach the visual targets in the presence of
the visuomotor transformations are collected. Empirical findings will be presented characterizing
explicit and implicit adaptive processes with respect to their sensitivity to aging, their potential for
generalization, and their susceptibility to delays in outcome feedback.

106

Contributions

Inability to decode predictable semantic categories from EEG during
silent pauses in spoken language
Edvard Aslak Heikel, Jona Sassenhagen & Christian J. Fiebach
Goethe University of Frankfurt
edvardheikel@gmail.com

Predictive coding proposes that the brain continuously predicts incoming sensory information in a
probabilistic, Bayesian-like manner, based on mental models of the external sources of sensory
information. Many neural correlates of language processing seem to be plausibly associated with the
prediction error (e.g. violation-related ERPs like the N400). However, the neural signatures of
linguistic predictions themselves have so far remained elusive. One plausible approach to identifying
neural correlates of top-down predictions during perception is to abolish bottom-up sensory
information. We aimed to investigate the neurophysiological realization of linguistic predictions
during the perception of spoken sentences, by using EEG and two separate multivariate pattern
analysis (MVPA) approaches (Generalization Across Time, XDawn) to decode the semantic category
of a predictable word from brain activity during a 1 second pause preceding the word itself. In two
separate studies, pauses were inserted prior to target words occurring in sentence contexts that were
constraining towards either an animate or an inanimate noun (Experiment 1, N=41), or an abstract
or concrete noun (Experiment 2, N=36). Analyzing EEG activity during the pre-target word pause
with MVPA, we found no evidence for above chance decoding, neither for animacy nor for
concreteness (p > .05; accuracies ~50%).

Of revolutionaries and sycophants: Insight into the effects of group
status and permeability of group boundaries on multiple aspects of ingroup identification
Paul Michael Heineck, Jenny Roth & Roland Deutsch
University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology II
paul-michael.heineck@stud-mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

Research shows that low group status reduces in-group identification compared to high status,
especially when group boundaries are permeable. However, previous research did not differentiate
among distinct aspects of in-group identification (e.g., satisfaction, solidarity, centrality, in-group
homogeneity, and individual self-stereotyping). Considering the various aspects will shed light on
how people deal with the threat of low status. In two experiments, we test the influence of group
status and permeability on in-group identification aspects. Assuming that solidarity serves as a
functional coping strategy (collective action), we hypothesize that impermeability increases solidarity
in low status groups compared to when group boundaries are permeable, without influencing
another aspect of in-group identification. In Experiment 1, we assigned participants to novel social
groups and manipulated group status and permeability and assessed in-group identification aspects.
The results showed no evidence for the hypothesized alteration of solidarity in response to the
(im)permeability. The effect of status was marginally significant, mainly driven by satisfaction
(consistent to our previous findings). For method improvements, in Experiment 2, we will instruct
participants to indicate a group that they belong to which is of low/high status and low/high
permeability. Results are still pending but will be presented on the poster.

107

Contributions

Post-Conflict Speeding in Motivational Conflicts
Christina Heitmann & Roland Deutsch
University Würzburg, Psychology
christina.heitmann@uni-wuerzburg.de

Sequential effects in conflict processing, such as post-conflict slowing, have primarily been studied in
stimulus-response compatibility (SRC) tasks, such as the Simon or Stroop task. Although some
researchers suggest that similar processes play a role in higher-level motivational conflicts, we
propose that SRC-based theories on conflict processing cannot be applied to approach-approach
(AA) and avoidance-avoidance (VV) conflicts without modification. We expected the intrinsic valence
and motivational orientation of motivational conflicts to modulate sequential effects. Specifically,
instead of post-conflict slowing, we predicted speeding after AA conflicts, because we expected the
approach motivation component of AA conflicts to induce a short-lived increase in action-readiness.
To test this prediction, participants repeatedly solved AA, VV, or no conflicts (NC) by choosing one
of two valent vignettes in three experiments. In Experiments 2 and 3, we manipulated the intertrial
interval (ITI) to examine the time course of sequential effects in motivational conflicts. We observed
the expected speeding after AA conflicts in Experiment 1 and the short ITI condition of Experiment 2
and 3. As sequential effects emerge in higher-level motivational conflicts and are modulated by the
type of conflict, these results extend previous research and theory on sequential effects in conflict
processing.

The influence of task relevance in a dual task situation
Clara Hellweg & Christina Bermeitinger
Universität Hildesheim, Institut für Psychologie
hellweg@uni-hildesheim.de

Everyday life often requires us to perform more than one task at a time. In these situations task
performance in one or both tasks is often impaired. Sometimes one task is more important than the
other one. The present study examines how task relevance influences dual task performance.
Participants worked through tasks from the German version of the Compound Remote Associate
(CRA) Test while simultaneously performing a spatial cueing paradigm. We varied the importance of
both tasks between subjects. The results suggest that performance in a dual task situation is
influenced by the relative importance of each individual task.

108

Contributions

To kill or not to kill – Scrutinizing the effects of personal involvement,
death avoidability, and egoistic incentives on moral judgment in
sacrificial dilemmas
Max Hennig & Mandy Hütter

Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen
maximilian.hennig@uni-tuebingen.de

Moral judgment research has traditionally relied on sacrificial dilemmas, in which one has to decide
whether to kill one person in order to save the lives of several others. In this traditional paradigm, not
killing would be interpreted as an inclination to adhere to absolute norms, while killing was taken to
indicate a sensitivity to consequences of an action. However, the traditional dilemma approach
suffers from several methodological problems. First, it is not clear whether killing someone is
motivated by a focus on consequences or the rejection of norms. Second, the decision to kill or not to
kill may be heavily influenced by general (in)action tendencies. Due to these limitations,
interpretation of previous results indicating that dilemma judgments depend on the avoidability of the
death of the target person, the presence of egoistic incentives, and psychological distance during the
act of killing remains ambiguous. Applying multinomial processing tree modelling to avoid these
problems, we investigated the mechanisms underlying those effects. The results of a high-powered
study (N = 692) suggest that egoistic incentives impact moral dilemma judgments by influencing
consequence-focused processing, while death avoidability exerts an effect via norm-focused
processing. These findings challenge recent theories of moral judgment.

lab.js: A free, open, online experiment builder
Felix Henninger1, Ulf K. Mertens2, Yury Shevchenko3, Pascal J. Kieslich3 & Benjamin E. Hilbig1
University of Koblenz-Landau, Cognitive Psychology Lab; 2University of Heidelberg, Psychological Methods;
University of Mannheim, Chair of Experimental Psychology
mailbox@felixhenninger.com

1
3

lab.js makes it easy to build experiments for both online and in-laboratory data collection. Through
its visual interface, stimuli can be designed and combined without programming, though studies’
appearance and behavior can be fully customized using code if required. The browser-based
runtime enables fast-paced stimulus presentation, and provides accurate measurement of response
times. Experiments constructed with lab.js can be exported to any web server for online data
collection, and included in common survey tools. Studies can also be shared, archived, re-used and
adapted, enabling effortless, transparent replications, and cumulative science; we provide a library
of common paradigms and demonstrations as a starting point. The software is provided free of
charge under an open-source license; further information, code and extensive documentation are
available from https://felixhenninger.github.io/lab.js/

109

Contributions

Habit outweighs Planning in Grasp Selection for Object Manipulation
Oliver Herbort

Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Department of Psychology
oliver.herbort@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de

Actions are usually planned with the next step in mind. For example, participants who grasp and
manipulate objects select grasps that reduce the arm excursion at the end of the object manipulation
(“end-state comfort effect”). We addressed whether the adjustment of grasps to subsequent object
manipulations is controlled habitually, based on experienced action outcomes, or by planning,
based on an evaluation of expected action outcomes. In an experiment, we devaluated the
adjustment of grasps to various dial rotations, which led to a reduction of the end-state comfort
effect. Participants continued to use the grasps acquired during the devaluation phases in test trials,
even though adjusting the grasp to different rotations would have been more efficient in these trials.
This suggests that grasp selection for object manipulation is primarily under habitual control. Thus,
grasp selection for object manipulation (i.e., the end-state comfort effect) is not primarily driven by
the anticipation of upcoming object manipulation movements or their end-states.

P-distribution: Optimizing the inferential value of p-values via
resampling techniques
Arianne Herrera-Bennett & Moritz Heene

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet, Psychology in the Learning Sciences
arianne.herrera-bennett@psy.lmu.de

Psychologists are increasingly calling into question whether researchers should trust single studies
and p-values interpreted in isolation. Demonstrated in Cumming’s ‘dance of the p-values’, the
unpredictable nature of p-values supports the statistical reform push toward use of replication and
meta-analytic techniques, to create a fuller evidential context within which to evaluate phenomena. Pvalues, however, can be highly informative when expected variation in replication is accounted for:
The theoretical distribution of p-values can be determined as a function of effect size (ES); null effects
have uniform plots, whereas larger effects become right-skewed. The current research appeals to
Monte Carlo simulation to investigate how resampling k subsamples (n) from the same initial sample
(N), and plotting the p-distribution, might provide further informational value, within the context of
drawing inferences from a single study. Design follows a 3 (N: 100, 500, 1000) x 3 (n: 10, 50,
100) x 4 (ES: 0.0, 0.2, 0.5, 0.8) x 2 (with vs. without replacement) model. Observed ES is
calculated for each p-value. P-distribution shape and mean ES estimates are compared against
population parameters, and serve as proxies for population representativeness. Results explore how
‘contextualizing’ single p-values within a p-distribution, via resampling techniques (e.g.,
bootstrapping), can optimize p-values’ inferential value.

110

Contributions

Visual feature prediction before saccadic eye movements
Arvid Herwig & Christian H. Poth

Bielefeld University, Department of Psychology & CITEC
arvid.herwig@uni-bielefeld.de

Saccadic eye movements change the retinal position and spatial resolution of objects. The visual
system seems to accommodate these changes by predicting object features across the saccade,
based on learned associations between presaccadic and postsaccadic input (Herwig & Schneider,
2014, JEPG). Accordingly, peripheral perception should be biased toward previously associated
foveal input shortly before a saccade is executed. Such bias effects can be evoked by altering
participants’ visual stimulation, so that one object is systematically changed during saccades. Up to
now, these bias effects were tested only indirectly by adjusting a postsaccadic foveal test stimulus to
the memorized presaccadic peripheral stimulus. Therefore, it is unclear whether the biases really
arise predictively, in presaccadic perception, or retrospectively, in postsaccadic memory. To clarify
this issue, we replaced the postsaccadic adjustment task with a 2AFC-task: A central and peripheral
stimulus were presented simultaneously before the saccade and participants had to select the stimulus
that was more curved. Importantly, the results showed clear biases in the PSEs for objects whose
curvature had changed in a preceding learning phase. This provides direct evidence that the feature
biases arise in a predictive fashion in presaccadic perception.

Category-selective processing in the two visual pathways as a
function of visibility
Guido Hesselmann, Natasha Darcy & Philipp Sterzer
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin
g.hesselmann@gmail.com

Category-selective visual processing is a core characteristic of the ventral vision-for-perception
pathway, but it is also found in cortical areas along the dorsal vision-for-action pathway. According
to the two-visual-systems hypothesis (TVSH), ventral stream processing is closely linked to visual
awareness, while dorsal stream processing is not. Category-selective processing of fully visible
stimuli has been reported in both pathways, but so far the relationship between levels of visibility
and functional activity has not been systematically examined for both streams. Recently, we used
continuous flash suppression (CFS) in a functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study to
modulate the visibility of face and tool stimuli (Ludwig, Sterzer, Kathmann, & Hesselmann; Cortex,
2016). Using multivariate pattern analysis (MVPA), we observed that decoding accuracies in ventral
areas more closely reflected graded differences in awareness compared to dorsal areas. In our
follow-up fMRI experiment (N=20), we modulated the recognisability of the same stimulus sets by
linear combinations of the original images and phase noise images. The phase noise approach
minimizes the low-level differences between images associated with different signal-to-noise ratios
and levels of visibility. Our fMRI-MVPA analysis explores the visibility tuning curves of categoryselective cortical areas in the human ventral and dorsal visual pathways.

111

Contributions

Separate and combined effects of action relevance and motivational
value on visual working memory
Anna Heuer & Anna Schubö
Philipps-Universität Marburg
anna.heuer@uni-marburg.de

The attentional modulation of visual working memory (VWM) according to differences in taskrelevance, established with the retrocue paradigm, has attracted considerable interest in recent
years. In the present study, we examined two more indirect selection biases established by
concurrent tasks or learnt reward associations: action relevance and motivational value. In three
experiments, memory performance was assessed with the same colour change detection task.
Potential action relevance and motivational value were each determined by a specific feature of the
memory items (location and shape) and manipulated in an orthogonal fashion. Investigated in
isolation (Experiments 1A and 1B), both selection biases modulated VWM. In combination
(Experiment 2), action relevance and motivational value still each exerted an influence on VWM, but
not in a fully independent and additive manner. While action relevance impacted on performance
irrespective of the reward associated with the items, an effect of motivational value was only
observed for action-irrelevant items. These results support the notion that VWM is automatically
biased as an inherent part of action planning. More generally, these findings highlight the versatile
nature of VWM: Contents can be flexibly weighted to reflect differences in their importance, taking
into account several sources of information.

Automatic Preference Acquisition: Subliminal stimulus presentation in
Evaluative Conditioning
Tobias Heycke & Christoph Stahl

University of Cologne, Department of Psychology
t.heycke@uni-koeln.de

Evaluative Conditioning (EC) is defined as a change in liking of a target object (conditioned stimulus,
CS) that is due to the pairing of the CS with a negative or positive stimulus (unconditioned stimulus,
US; De Houwer, 2007). Evaluative Conditioning is proposed as a mechanism of automatic
preferences acquisition in dual-process theories of attitudes (Gawronski & Bodenhausen, 2006).
Support for the automaticity of EC comes from studies showing EC effects for subliminally presented
stimuli (e.g., Rydell, McConnell, Mackie, & Strain, 2006; Dijksterhuis, 2004). However, the findings
of previous studies showing subliminal EC, have recently been challenged on methodological
grounds (Sweldens, Corneille, & Yzerbyt, 2014) and by empirical findings (Stahl, Haaf, & Corneille,
2016). In a series of Experiments we investigated possible boundary conditions for EC effects to
occur with subliminally presented stimuli. Specifically, we tested whether the following settings would
be beneficial for EC effects to occur: (I) goal-relevance during the learning procedure and a relation
between CS and US (II) subliminal US presentation with additional counter attitudinal information
and (III) a simultaneous presentation of CS and US. We found indications for the absence of EC
effects in all paradigms and implications for theories explaining EC are discussed.

112

Contributions

Gender differences in multitasking
Patricia Hirsch1, Iring Koch1 & Julia Karbach2

RWTH Aachen University, Cognitive and Experimental Psychology; 2University of Koblenz Landau, Developmental
and Educational Psychology
patricia.hirsch@psych.rwth-aachen.de

1

To examine whether there are gender-related differences in multitasking performance, 48 female and
48 male subjects participated in a task-switching experiment and a dual-task experiment. In the taskswitching experiment, we found mixing costs (i.e., repetition trials of mixed-task conditions vs. singletask conditions) and switch costs (i.e., repetition trials vs. switch trials of mixed-task conditions). In the
dual-task experiment, we observed dual-task costs (i.e., Task 2 [T2] performance in dual-task
conditions vs. performance in single-task conditions) and a psychological refractory period (PRP)
effect (i.e., T2 performance with short vs. long stimulus onset asynchrony, SOA). Neither the
switching-related performance costs nor the dual-task related performance costs differed across
gender, suggesting a comparable multitasking performance for women and men.

Zum Einfluss sozialer Erwünschtheit auf Selbstberichte der
Organspendebereitschaft – eine experimentelle Validierung zweier
Non-Randomized-Response-Verfahren
Adrian Hoffmann & Jochen Musch

University of Duesseldorf, Department of Psychology
adrian.hoffmann@uni-duesseldorf.de

Die Ergebnisse aktueller Umfragen legen nahe, dass bis zu zwei Drittel der deutschen Bevölkerung
grundsätzlich zu einer Organspende bereit sind (Uhlig et al., 2015); tatsächlich führen jedoch
gerade einmal 15-25% der Bevölkerung einen Organspendeausweis mit sich (Krampen & Junk,
2006; Heuer et al., 2013). Die soziale Erwünschtheit der Bereitschaft zur Organspende könnte
diese Diskrepanz erklären; die tatsächliche Spendebereitschaft würde demnach in Selbstberichten
überschätzt werden. Mit zwei indirekten Non-Randomized-Response-Befragungsverfahren (Tian &
Tang, 2014; Yu, Tian & Tang, 2008) wurde der Einfluss sozial erwünschten Antwortverhaltens
kontrolliert. Erwartungsgemäß führten beide Verfahren zu niedrigeren Schätzungen des Anteils
spendewilliger Umfrageteilnehmer als eine direkte Befragung. Die niedrigeren Schätzungen sind
potentiell weniger durch sozial erwünschtes Antwortverhalten verzerrt und insofern valider. Vor- und
Nachteile der verwendeten Modelle sowie die Implikationen der Ergebnisse für die
Umfrageforschung werden diskutiert.

113

Contributions

Integrating cue abstraction with retrieval from memory: A learning
approach
Janina Hoffmann1, Rebecca Albrecht2 & Bettina von Helversen3

University of Konstanz; 2University of Basel; 3University of Zurich
janina.hoffmann@uni-konstanz.de
1

When making a judgment, such as evaluating the food in the cafeteria, it has been argued that
people select among two kinds of judgment strategies: a capacity-limited abstraction of knowledge
and a similarity-based retrieval of past instances. To disentangle these strategies, past research has
usually assumed that people consistently pursue the same strategy over time. The question of how
strategies change over time as a function of learning has received less attention. The current work
aims to fill this gap by formulating a learning model that develops a preference for one strategy over
the other over time by adjusting the relative importance of different cues and past exemplars during
learning. In simulations, the learning model replicates previous research findings, such as the finding
that linear relationships are learned faster than nonlinear ones. Importantly, the learning model
allows to disentangle trial-by-trial strategy shifts from a preference for integrating knowledge
abstraction with exemplar retrieval. We test the model’s distinct predictions for judgment accuracy
and familiarity judgments in a judgment task requiring both knowledge abstraction and exemplar
retrieval. In sum, a learning model integrating knowledge abstraction and exemplar retrieval may
provide a suitable tool for understanding learning processes in judgment.

Sources of task prioritization: The interplay of response modalities
and task order
Mareike Amelie Hoffmann, Aleks Pieczykolan & Lynn Huestegge
University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology
mareike.hoffmann@uni-wuerzburg.de

When two tasks are executed at once, performance typically suffers from longer reaction times and
higher error rates. These dual-task costs are often distributed asymmetrically among tasks—a finding
that has been suggested to result from task order in a “first come, first served” manner due to a
cognitive bottleneck based on the temporal prioritization of Task 1. Interestingly, in the multitasking
literature mostly a restricted range of response modalities has been employed for studying cognitive
processing in dual-task control. However, in recent studies we observed substantial differences in
dual-task performance based on response modality characteristics. We interpret these effects in terms
of an ordinal prioritization structure among response modalities that cannot be explained with serial
“first come, first served” accounts. While previous results were observed in dual-task settings with
equal stimulus priorities (simultaneous stimulus presentation), in the present study we aim at
dissociating two potential sources of task prioritization: Temporal (bottom-up) prioritization based on
task order and (top-down) prioritization based on response modality characteristics. Therefore, we
compare dual-task performance across response modalities in the PRP paradigm (sequential stimulus
presentation). Our results strongly indicate to consider characteristics of the response modality in
dual-task control theories additionally to temporal task priorities.

114

Contributions

Beyond mean comparisons: a model based process-level comparison
of online and laboratory based experimental data
Luisa Horsten, Felix Henninger & Benjamin E. Hilbig
University of Koblenz-Landau, Cognitive Psychology
hors6866@uni-landau.de

In many experiments, multiple psychological processes can account for the same observed pattern of
outcomes. However, if one only considers measurement-level operational statistics (such as reaction
time means), their effects can hardly be differentiated from those of mechanisms underlying a
specific task (e.g. experimental conditions). Instead, latent cognitive processes and extraneous
delays can be revealed by careful decomposition, for example through cognitive modeling. We
apply this insight to context effects in laboratory- vs. online-based data collection of two-choice
response time tasks, where recent reports have not found effects of setting on aggregate reaction
times measures, suggesting equivalence at least at the level of measurement. Using a diffusion model
we reanalyze existing data to examine whether this conclusion can be extended to the level of
parameters that capture underlying cognitive processes. Based on our findings, we discuss more
generally the extent to which surface-level measurements allow for inferences to the underlying
cognitive processes.

Multitasking in the perihand space: Effects of stimulus-hand proximity
on between-task shifts at the bottleneck
Thomas Hosang1, Rico Fischer2, Jennifer Pomp3 & Roman Liepelt1

German Sport University, Institute of Psychology; 2University of Greifswald, Institute of Psychology; 3University of
Muenster, Institute of Psychology
t.hosang@dshs-koeln.de
1

Single-task studies indicate that visual processing is altered in the perihand space. Whether hand
proximity alters multitasking performance is currently unknown. We performed a series of three
experiments testing if stimulus-hand proximity influences between-task shifts at the bottleneck. In all
experiments subjects had to execute a dual task with varying stimulus-onset asynchrony. Task 1
(numerical judgment) had to be performed with task priority and Task 2 (color judgement) had to be
performed subsequently. Hands were placed either on the side of a computer screen (hands near) or
on the lap (hands far). In Experiment 1, both stimuli were separately presented on the right (Task 1)
and left side (Task 2) of the screen. In Experiment 2, a single bivalent stimulus was presented
centrally, both tasks referring to different stimulus features. In Experiment 3, the combined stimulus
could appear on both sides. In all three experiments, we found evidence of the typical psychological
refractory period (PRP) effect, but no impact of hand proximity on the size of the PRP effect. Together,
these findings indicate 1) the general robustness of the PRP effect and 2) that stimulus-hand proximity
does not alter the shifting process between two tasks.

115

Contributions

Support for the prediction hypothesis of visual stability: Invalid
peripheral preview increases the fixation-locked N170 face inversion
effect
Christoph Huber-Huber, Clayton Hickey & David Melcher
CIMeC, University of Trento
christoph.huberhuber@unitn.it

One explanation for the world’s stable appearance despite saccadic eye movements is that the
efference copy of the motor plan enables predictions about what will be perceived after the
saccade. If so, then a violation of this prediction should be detrimental to post-saccadic perceptual
processing. We investigated this hypothesis with a peripheral preview paradigm using combined
EEG and eye-tracking. Participants made cued saccades to one of two lateral upright and/or
inverted faces. During the saccade, the faces could change their orientation (invalid preview) or
remain the same (valid preview). Consistent with the idea that valid predictions facilitate perception,
a whole-scalp analysis of the post-saccadic EEG showed that the initial phase of the fixation-locked
response was dominated by the preview face orientation. The target face orientation began to
modulate this effect around 100ms. Invalid previews lead to more pronounced P1, N2, and N170
components than valid previews. These effects appeared to have behavioral consequences. Target
face tilt performance was better in valid compared to invalid preview conditions. The results are
consistent with the idea that predictions are created from peripheral previews prior to the saccade,
improving the efficiency of post-saccadic processing as measured both by behavior and evoked
responses.

Numerosity estimation benefits from transsaccadic information
integration
Carolin Hübner & Alexander C. Schütz
Philipps-Universität Marburg
carolin.huebner@uni-marburg.de

Humans achieve a stable and homogeneous representation of their visual environment, although
visual processing varies across the visual field. Here, we investigated under which circumstances
peripheral and foveal information is integrated for numerosity estimation across saccades. We asked
our participants to judge the number of black and white dots on a screen. Information was presented
either in the periphery before a saccade, in the fovea after a saccade, or in both areas consecutively
to measure transsaccadic integration. We used a maximum-likelihood model to predict accuracy and
reliability in the transsaccadic condition based on peripheral and foveal values. We found nearoptimal integration of peripheral and foveal information, consistently with previous findings about
orientation integration. In a consecutive experiment, we disrupted object continuity between the
peripheral and foveal presentation to probe the limits of transsaccadic integration. Even for global
changes on our numerosity stimuli, no influence of object discontinuity was observed. Overall, our
results suggest that transsaccadic integration is a robust mechanism that also works for complex
visual features such as numerosity and that is operative despite of internal or external mismatches
between foveal and peripheral information. Transsaccadic integration facilitates an accurate and
reliable perception of our environment.

116

Contributions

Alternativer Navigationskonzepte für Radfahrer: eine Usability-Studie
Anja Katharina Huemer, Ulla Willrodt & Mark Vollrath

Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institut für Psychologie, Ingenieur- und Verkehrspsychologie
a.huemer@tu-braunschweig.de

Fahrrelevante Navigationsinformationen können ohne sicherheitskritische Ablenkung vermittelt
werden, wenn weder eine kognitive Beanspruchung noch eine Blickabwendung von der Straße zur
Wahrnehmung notwendig wird. Ziel der vorliegenden Studie ist es, ein fahrradspezifisches
Navigationssystem, welches diese Anforderungen erfüllen soll, auf dessen Effektivität, Effizienz und
Akzeptanz in einer Probandenstudie im Fahrrad-Fahrsimulator zu prüfen. Bei dem innovativen
System werden die Richtungsinformationen (rechts, links, geradeaus) durch weiß blinkende LEDLeuchten an beiden Seiten des Lenkers peripher wahrnehmbar vermittelt. Es werden Fahr- und
Blickdaten sowie das Nutzerfeedback erfasst und mit drei weiteren Bedingungen verglichen:
Klassische Display-Navigation, Kombinations-Bedingung (LED und Display) und eine zweite LEDNavigation ohne die Instruktion vorab, die Informationen möglichst peripher wahrzunehmen. Die
Auswertung zeigt, dass in der LED peripher-Bedingung seltener der falsche Weg gewählt wurde als
in der Klassischen Display-Bedingung. Darüber hinaus sind die Gesamtdauer der Blickabwendungen
von der Straße, die Gesamtdauer der Fixationen auf die Navigationsanzeige (LED-Leiste oder
Display) und die Blickfrequenzen auf Straße und Anzeige in der LED peripher-Bedingung signifikant
geringer als in jeder der drei anderen Bedingungen. Das Nutzerfeedback ist zudem signifikant
besser als in der Klassischen Display-Bedingung. Die Resultate verdeutlichen, dass eine LEDNavigation effektiv (korrekte Wahl des Weges) und effizient (weniger Blickabwendung) ist und von
den ProbandInnen positiv bewertet wird.

Emotion-Evoked Central-Peripheral Trade-off Effects: Sensory gating
and recall
Lana Husagic & Arianne Herrera-Bennett
Ludwig Maximilian University, Psychology
lana.husagic@gmail.com

Central-peripheral trade-off effects are well-documented within emotion literature, and have been
explored in relation to the concept that facial expressions possess discrete functional and adaptive
effects on sensory gating (Farb et al., 2013): While fear broadens one’s perceptual scope to
optimally identify danger, anger narrows intake toward the angry face itself wherein originates the
threat. Moreover, retention for contextual details, at the expense of central information, was found to
be greater in the presence of fear faces, and vice-versa for angry (Davis et al., 2011). Building off
this framework, the current work appealed to the crossmodal integration methodology, to i) replicate
how expressivity from central (facial) and peripheral (vocal) sources can bias perceptual intake, and
ii) investigate potential trade-off effects of central-peripheral content recall, as a function of each
discrete emotion (happy/angry/neutral). Participants underwent 2 blocks (36 audiovisual trials)
tasked to classify emotion within the face (2 force-choice- alternatives); fully-crossed design with 2
within-subject factors: Face (H/A/N) x Voice (H/A/N), and counterbalanced recall blocks. 2-way
repeated-measures ANOVA and post-hoc contrasts demonstrate facilitatory effects of emotional
congruency on speed and accuracy of emotion identification. Trade-off effects contribute to the
understanding of emotional sensory integration as a mechanism underlying altered peripheral
semantic content retention.

117

Contributions

Cue value discriminability moderates learning and generalization in
evaluative cue conditioning
Mandy Hütter & Katharina Theresa Berger
Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen
mandy.huetter@uni-tuebingen.de

Generalization can occur via the similarity of stimuli to a valent stimulus in a multi-attribute space or
along a cue dimension that is related to valence. Evaluative cue conditioning (ECC) refers to the
change in liking of stimuli that share a feature that is correlated with valence. In the present talk, I
focus on the moderators of ECC and generalization to new instances that share the conditioned cue.
Specifically, we manipulated the cue values’ discriminability by contrasting them with other moderate
or other extreme cue values. Across two experiments, we demonstrate that the strength of learning
depends on this factor, so that a broader range of cue values results in stronger effects on evaluative
ratings and contingency judgments. We also demonstrate that transfer effects are larger with a
broad rather than a small range used for learning. In summary, ECC appears to be a function of the
cue values present in a given environment. Theoretical and practical implications of this work will be
discussed.

Adaptation of depth ordering preferences during motion transparency
Byung-Woo Hwang & Alexander C. Schütz

Philipps-Universität Marburg, Allgemeine und Biologische Psychologie
hwang@uni-marburg.de

Previous studies revealed that there are idiosyncratic depth order preferences to perceive certain
motion directions in front during motion transparency depth rivalry (Mamassian & Wallace, 2010;
Schütz, 2014). We investigated whether the adaptation of stereoscopic motion alters individuals’
depth order preferences. In the pre-adaptation phase, we measured depth order preferences for
each participant during motion transparency. The transparent motion consisted of two opposite
motion directions of coherently moving dots and participants had to report which motion direction
they perceived in front. In the adaptation phase, stereoscopic motion adaptation was embedded in
each trial before measuring depth order preferences. The adaptor comprised of two opposite motion
directions with negative and positive disparities in which the motion direction at the front coincided
with the preferred direction measured in the pre-adaptation phase. In the post-adaptation phase, we
measured depth order preferences in the same manner as in the pre-adaptation phase. After
adaptation, the preferences of some participants rotated strongly away from their original
preference. The remaining participants showed a distortion of their preference function close to the
adapted direction with little rotation from their original preference. These results imply that there
could be two qualitatively distinctive consequences of stereoscopic motion adaptation.

118

Contributions

Frustration-aware cars. Application and constraints for in-vehicle
frustration recognition
Klas Ihme, Meng Zhang & Uwe Drewitz

German Aerospace Center, Institute of Transportation Systems, Department of Human Factors
klas.ihme@dlr.de

Frustration is frequently experienced by persons inside a car, for example during dense traffic
preventing fast driving or when system functionality does not work as intended. A frustrated driver’s
perception may be negatively influenced and s/he might get aggressive leading to decreased traffic
safety. Furthermore, experiencing frustration has also a negative impact on comfort and therefore is
even still relevant when humans are not in control anymore, but are rather users or passengers of
automated vehicles. Therefore, from a human factors perspective it appears useful to equip future
cars with the capability to recognize the current frustration level of the humans inside the car,
appropriately react to it and by that help to balance their affective state as well as mitigate the
negative effects of frustration. In our talk, we will present the results of several driving simulator
studies investigating behavioral and (neuro-) physiological indicators of frustration that can be used
to enable automated recognition of frustration. In addition, we will discuss the next steps towards
fully frustration-aware vehicles and propose strategies how intelligent vehicles could adapt to the
current level of frustration of people in the car.

A Sampling Approach to Evaluative Conditioning
Max Ihmels & Mandy Hütter

Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen
max.ihmels@uni-tuebingen.de

In evaluative conditioning (EC), a conditioned stimulus (CS) is paired with positive or negative
unconditioned stimuli (US) and consequently acquires US valence. Typically, in EC paradigms,
participants have no control over the information they receive. We overcome this shortcoming by
introducing sampling into the EC paradigm. We repeatedly give participants control over which CSs
they want to sample (i.e., for what CSs they want to see conditioning trials). One half of the
available CSs is paired positively, while the other half is paired negatively. We also include a yoked
condition, in which participants get to see equivalent information to the sampling condition (i.e.
same number of conditioning trials for different CSs), but do not get to make any decisions. In two
experiments, we find that a preference for sampling positively over negatively paired CSs develops
over time. We find stronger EC effects in the sampling than in the yoked condition and also find
evidence for stronger EC effects for larger numbers of CS-US pairings. Further, we find that higher
numbers of interactions lead to more positive evaluation changes, but only in the sampling and not
in the yoked condition. Implications for the ecological validity of EC paradigms are discussed.

119

Contributions

From motor learning to exergaming for motor rehabilitation of
neurological movement disorders
Winfried Ilg

Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University Clinic Tuebingen
winfried.ilg@uni-tuebingen.de

In this talk, I will present our work on exergaming and VR in patients with neurological movement
disorders. Exergaming have shown to be a motivating approach to realize effective motor training,
which enable the patients to exercise at home with high training intensity and in changing interactive
game scenarios, which allow the individual adjustment and gradual increase of training complexity.
VR approaches with head mounted display delivers the interesting possibility, to manipulate the
environments in specific ways and thus to investigate reactive and adaptive behaviour of
neurological patients to these manipulated environments. In order to examine the behaviour of
patients in such environments, we combine head mounted displays with online motion tracking of the
whole body or the hands. Potential applications will be discussed on the examples of stroke patients
which present impairments in the perception of the vertical axis or which neglect motor behaviour of
one body despite of sensomotoric functioning.

Assessment tool for measuring a driver’s willingness of interaction
Jonas Imbsweiler, Jeanine Bachmann, Julius Braun, Tobias Weyer & Barbara Deml
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology - ifab - Institute of Human and Industrial Engineering
jonas.imbsweiler@kit.edu

A lot of research questions afford to gain a deeper insight into the interaction behavior of car
drivers. Unfortunately, when doing research in a driving simulator, a measurement tool for
classifying the driving style on a continuum of offensive and defensive behavior is missing so far.
Within this work a testing procedure based on the driving simulation SILAB was developed and
pretested by N=34 subjects. It contains ten driving maneuvers (e.g. driving through a coequalnarrow-passage), in which drivers may reveal a distinct cooperation behavior. Each situation was
assessed (0 for rule-consistent-behavior, +1 for rule-inconsistent-offensive-behavior, -1 for ruleinconsistent-defensive-behavior). On the basis of the sum, the overall interaction-style was derived.
Four situations had to be removed as all subjects behaved the same and thus, these stimuli did not
reveal to be selective. The results show that the situations differ (F(1,5)=160.469,p<.000,?²=.925).
The overall driving behavior was not rule-consistent as the derived sum differs from the value 0 in a
highly significant manner (t(34)=-11.414,p<.000,M=-1.353,SD=.691). In further studies the testing
procedure shall be improved in order to allow for testing more traffic situations. The relationship
between the observed driving style and further personality traits as well as further interaction
behavior shall be studied in detail.

120

Contributions

The effect of auditory stimuli in visual search task
Orsolya Inhóf, András Norbert Zsidó, Gergely Darnai, Beatrix Lábadi & György Révész
University of Pécs
inhof.orsolya@gmail.com

Large body of research found that auditory signals could induce faster detection. It has also been
shown that auditory information could affect the processing of the visual stimuli, and vice versa, the
visual information could affect auditory processing. The dominant modality hypotheses explain this
asymmetry between the modalities; and are based on detection tasks. However, previous studies did
not concerned how the different properties of stimulus (e.g. discontinuity, reliability) affect the success
of integration in attention tasks. We used a visual search task, to examine the dominant modality
hypotheses. Participants heard auditory signals on the same or opposite side compared to the visual
target stimuli. In Experiment 1, we used different auditory stimuli (continuous, floating and moving).
While in Experiment 2, participants learned the connection between the two modalities before
conducting the same task as in Experiment 1. Our results showed that acoustic information did not
affect visual search performance. The discontinuity of the sound would not increase the probability of
integration; even after practice. Participants detected the target on either side of the auditory stimuli
equally as quick, even in the integration facilitating conditions. Our results suggest the dominant
modality hypotheses can only be used in detection tasks.

The influence of sequential structure and temporal effect predictability
on dual-task interference
Monno Irina1, Fang Zhao2, Robert Gaschler3 & Thomaschke Roland1

Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Psychologie Allgemeine Psychologie: Cognition, Action, and
Sustainability; 2FernUniversität in Hagen, Institut für Psychologie, LG Allgemeine Psychologie, LME; 3FernUniversität in
Hagen, Institut für Psychologie, LG Allgemeine Psychologie LME
irina.monno@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

1

Compared to single tasks, multitasking often impairs performance. Previous research has shown that
this impairment can be reduced by various kinds of predictabilities within the tasks. The present study
focuses on whether predictability of sequential structure or temporal predictability of action effects
influences dual-tasking. Previous research suggested that implicit sequence learning, as well as
action effect anticipation, and dual-task interference, are all strongly related to the response selection
stage in action processing. Thus, we hypothesized an interacting effect from sequence and effect
timing on dual-tasking. Participants did a spatial detection 4 choice task which was sequentially
ordered. Three sequences were presented, one of them was the most occurred. Simultaneously they
did a 2 choice digit identification task which was always randomly ordered. We manipulated
between subjects whether the target stimulus disappeared constantly delayed after the first task
response, constantly delayed after the second task response, or randomly delayed after the first or
second task response. Neither temporal effect predictability, nor sequential structure significantly
reduced dual-task interference, although the sequential structure was learned. Relations to contrasting
findings in previous research are discussed.

121

Contributions

Measures to integrate speed and accuracy: A critical assessment and
evaluation of their validity, utility, and problems
Markus Janczyk1 & Heinrich René Liesefeld2

Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, Department of Psychology; 2Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Department Psychologie and Graduate School of Systemic Neurosciences
markus.janczyk@uni-tuebingen.de

1

In psychological experiments, participants are typically instructed to respond as fast as possible
without sacrificing accuracy. How they interpret this instruction and, consequently, which speedaccuracy tradeoff they chose, might vary between experiments, between participants, and between
conditions. Consequently, experimental effects can appear unpredictably in either RTs or error rates.
Even more problematic, spurious effects might emerge that are actually due only to differential
speed-accuracy tradeoffs. An often suggested solution is the inverse efficiency score (IES; Townsend
& Ashby, 1978), which combines speed and accuracy into a single score. Alternatives are the ratecorrect score (RCS; Woltz & Was, 2006), the linear-integrated speed-accuracy score (LISAS;
Vandierendonck, 2016), and the Balanced Integration Score (BIS; Liesefeld, Fu, & Zimmer, 2015),
which was devised to integrate speed and accuracy with equal weights. We report analyses on
simulated data generated with the standard drift-diffusion model showing that IES, RCS, and LISAS
put unequal weight on speed and accuracy (even depending on the accuracy level) and that these
measures are actually very sensitive to speed-accuracy trade-offs. BIS strongly (but not fully)
attenuates SAT effects. Critical aspects of using either of these measures are discussed against the
background of undesired research strategies and their general applicability.

Considering sustainability in buying decisions: The role of altruism
and materialism
Jennifer Janeczko1, Gerrit Stöckigt1 & Matthias Brand2

University of Duisburg-Essen, Department of General Psychology: Cognition and Center for Behavioral Addiction
Research (CeBAR); 2General Psychology: Cognition and Center for Behavioral Addiction Research (CeBAR) Erwin L.
Hahn Institute for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
jennifer.janeczko@stud.uni-due.de
1

Decision-making processes in the context of offline and online shopping are very complex. Besides
many other shopping motivations, sustainability is a topic of emerging interest that should be
considered in buying decisions. Although several studies have examined the influence of sustainable
aspects on the decision-making process, little is known about the factors that could influence the
extent to which sustainability is considered in shopping situations. Even if the effects of characteristics
like altruism and materialism have already been discussed for environmentally responsible behavior,
it remains unclear whether both factors influence the consideration of sustainability in buying
decisions. Therefore, the current study (N = 154) tested the interaction of these components in a
structural equation model. Results indicate that the effect of altruism on the consideration of
sustainability in buying decisions is mediated by materialism. Consequently, altruism and materialism
seem to be important characteristics for the extent to which sustainability is considered in buying
decisions. Thus, encouraging altruistic tendencies while trying to decrease materialistic values in
society might lead to a higher consideration of sustainability in shopping situations. As a result, it
could become more likely for consumers to show sustainable behaviors in general.

122

Contributions

It’s just a matter of focus: distractor processing in a multisensory
flanker task is modulated by gaze
Anne Jensen1, Simon Merz1, Charles Spence2 & Christian Frings1

University of Trier, Cognitive Psychology; 2University of Oxford, Crossmodal Research Laboratory
jensen@uni-trier.de
1

In daily life, people integrate signals from different sensory modalities in order to create multisensory
objects. Further, relevant objects need to be selected against a background of irrelevant signals. In
this context, an important and controversial discussed question is whether attention is needed for
integration. We designed a flanker task where both target and distractor were multisensory (each
stimulus had a visual and an auditory feature) and the congruencies of the target and distractor
features were varied orthogonally. Further, we manipulated participants’ focus of gaze in order to
vary the amount of attention distributed to the distractor. People fixated either the target or the
distractor object. In both cases, the distractor produced interference based on congruency.
Interestingly, we found a modulation of the multisensory integration process for the irrelevant
distractor by gaze: when the distractor was fixated we found an interaction between the
congruencies of the two distractor features, when not fixated we found no interaction but just
additive congruency effects. So in a truly multisensory selection situation, attention seems necessary
for multisensory integration. When the distractor is inside of gaze, distractor processing changes
from a feature-based to an object-based processing.

Neural responses to outcome error prediction: the impact of selfinduced and externally-manipulated motor errors
Michael Joch, Mathias Hegele, Heiko Maurer, Hermann Müller & Lisa K. Maurer
Justus-Liebig-University, Department of Sport Science
michael.joch@sport.uni-giessen.de

In this study, we tested neural responses related to error-prediction (error-related-negativity, ERN) and
result-feedback reaction (feedback-related-negativity, FRN) in self-induced versus externally
manipulated errors, committed in a semi-virtual target throwing task. So far, 18 participants
practiced the motor task for two days. Afterwards, EEG recordings were conducted on three
consecutive days in which roughly every 20th target hit was manipulated to a target miss (exError).
With respect to error-prediction, we found medium sized effects in the mean-amplitude of the ERN
comparing target hits with errors (d = .45) and exErrors (d = .58), respectively, and only small
effects comparing hits and the manipulated exErrors (d = .19). Looking at the result-feedback
reaction, we found a FRN in externally-manipulated (d = 1.28) and self-induced (d = .85) errors. In
detail, there was a higher FRN amplitude in externally-manipulated than in self-induced errors (d =
.47). Our results indicate that an ERN can only be observed in trials where self-induced errors were
committed. This validates the assumption that the ERN is a neural correlate of motor error-prediction.
Lastly, the amplitude of FRN seems to depend on whether the motor system has predicted an error in
the ongoing trial.

123

Contributions

Part-List Cuing Impairment in Children: The Role of Encoding
Thomas John & Alp Aslan

Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Department of Psychology
thomas.john@psych.uni-halle.de

Providing a subset of previously studied items as a retrieval cue can impair recall of the remaining
items. Recent work has revealed that such part-list cuing (PLC) impairment depends on encoding,
being lasting with low associative encoding, but transient with high associative encoding. Here, we
investigated the role of encoding in children’s PLC. 7-8, 9-11, and 13-14 year-olds learned word
lists using either a single study trial (low associative encoding) or two study-test trials (high
associative encoding). Thereafter, two successive recall tests were administered, with PLC occurring
in the first but not the second test. The persistence of PLC impairment was inferred from its
presence/absence in the second test. Consistent with previous adult findings, the oldest age group
showed lasting PLC with low associative encoding, but transient PLC with high associative encoding.
In contrast, the two younger age groups showed lasting PLC regardless of encoding. The current
findings indicate that older but not younger children’s PLC depends on encoding. In particular,
following the suggested view that lasting PLC reflects retrieval inhibition, and transient PLC reflects
strategy disruption, the results indicate that inhibition and strategy disruption mediate PLC in older
children, whereas inhibition alone mediates PLC in younger children.

When predictive coding impedes perception
Ellen Joos1 & Jürgen Kornmeier2

INSERM U1114, Cognitive Neuropsychology and Pathophysiology of Schizophrenia, University of Strasbourg;
University of Freiburg, Medical Center, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy; Institute for Frontier Areas of
Psychology and Mental Health, Perception and Cognition Group; 2University of Freiburg, Medical Center,
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy; Institute for Frontier Areas of Psychology and Mental Health, Perception
and Cognition Group
juergen.kornmeier@uni-freiburg.de
1

The information available to our senses is restricted and to varying degrees ambiguous. Our
perceptual system applies memorized concepts in order to resolve current ambiguities and to
anticipate the “perceptual future” (predictive coding). We recently identified two ERP components,
reflecting the ambiguity of both a currently and a previously perceived stimulus. In the current study
we tested whether these ERPs are also sensitive to the ambiguity of a highly predictive upcoming
visual stimulus. We presented ambiguous Necker cubes and disambiguated cube variants in pairs
and varied ambiguity of the first (S1) and second (S2) stimulus in four separate conditions.
Participants indicated their percept of S1, and identical or changed percepts of S2 compared to S1.
Corresponding EEG traces and reaction times were analyzed. The ERP amplitudes to S1 reflect the
ambiguity of both the current S1 and the upcoming S2. Reaction times, in contrast, increased when
the stimulus quality changed from S1 to S2, regardless of the change direction. Our results indicate
that perceptual processing of the presence automatically implies predictions about the immediate
future. While this predictive coding strategy may be overall advantageous to resolve the pervasive
perceptual problem, it can become disadvantageous in certain situations.

124

Contributions

Age and individual differences in visual working memory: the role of
trial-by-trial fluctuations in attentional control
Kerstin Jost1, Atsushi Kikumoto2, Tina Schwarzkopp3 & Ulrich Mayr2

Brandenburg Medical School, Psychology; RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Psychology; 2University of
Oregon, Department of Psychology; 3RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Psychology
kerstin.jost@mhb-fontane.de
1

Working memory (WM) varies across individuals and declines with age. Recent evidence suggests
that for individual differences in WM performance, the consistency of attentional control turned out
to be a relevant predictor. We here investigated whether trial-by-trial fluctuations in WM
performance do also contribute to the overall smaller capacity estimates in older adults. We
measured performance fluctuations in a visual WM task with a whole-report procedure that allows
tracking the number of stored items in each trial. In accordance with previous findings, younger
adults differed substantially in performance consistency: Individuals, who scored low in a standard
WM task (low-capacity individuals) showed more performance failures than high-capacity
individuals even though they performed equally well in a large proportion of trials. Thus, fluctuations
in attentional control seems to be a major factor for individual differences rather than the storage
capacity per se. In contrast, for the elderly at least some individuals exhibited a performance pattern
that better fits with a capacity decline going beyond mere attentional failures. Thus, our findings
suggest that both variations in the consistency of attentional control as well as variations in WM
capacity contribute to the individual differences in WM performance of older adults.

Influence of tool-use experience on motor planning
Bianca Jovanovic & Gudrun Schwarzer

Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, FB 06, Developmental Psychology
bianca.jovanovic@psychol.uni-giessen.de

We investigated how learning to use an unfamiliar tool by applying a specific grip influences
children’s performance on grip choice in a rotation task assessing end-state comfort planning. Two
groups of children were trained to use one of two different grips –thumb-up or thumb-down- on a bar
to accomplish a task. Before and after training, children were required to rotate the bar and we
analysed in how far they would adopt an awkward initial hand orientation (thumb-down grip) to
insure a comfortable posture at the end of the rotation (end-state comfort effect). Results indicate that
children produced more awkward thumb-down grips on the rotation task when they had trained to
use the tool applying this specific grip, and less if they were trained on using an incongruent thumbup grip. This demonstrates how motor history implicated in a tool-use task influences efficient action
planning.

125

Contributions

Increasing Reward Prospect Motivates Switching to the More Difficult
Task: A Case of Motivation Efficiency?
Vanessa Jurczyk1, Kerstin Froeber1 & Gesine Dreisbach2

University of Regensburg, Chair for General and Applied Psychology (Prof. Dr. Dreisbach); 2University of
Regensburg, Chair for General and Applied Psychology
vanessa.jurczyk@psychologie.uni-regensburg.de
1

In daily life we are often confronted with changing tasks of different task difficulty. How does our
current motivational state influence which task we would choose in a given situation? Diverse
psychological theories suggest a direct link between motivation and task difficulty, namely a dynamic
increase in motivation with increasing task difficulty. Here we test whether this is a reciprocal
relationship: That is, does a higher motivational state bias participants’ decision in favor of the more
difficult of two tasks? In a series of three voluntary task switching experiments, reward magnitude
(low vs. high) was varied randomly between trials while participants could choose between an easy
and a difficult task. Recent research from our lab has shown that an increase in reward prospect is
associated with a higher proportion of voluntary switches (Fröber & Dreisbach, 2016). Thus, here
we hypothesized that the increase in reward prospect should especially promote voluntary switches
to the more difficult task. The results of all three experiments confirmed this prediction, suggesting
that participants avoid wasting the higher motivational arousal going along with increasing reward
prospect on the easier task. The results will be discussed in light of recent theorizing on effort-based
decision making.

Sensory attenuation of self-produced signals is driven by motorindependent predictions
Jakob Kaiser & Simone Schütz-Bosbach

Ludwig-Maximilian University, Experimental Psychology
J.Kaiser@psy.lmu.de

Sensory events produced by ourselves are known to lead to lower neural and perceptual impact than
sensory events from other environmental sources. This sensory attenuation is assumed to result from
control processes generated within the motor system, potentially helping us to distinguish effects
produced by oneself and others. However, previous research cannot rule out that self-produced
events are in fact attenuated due to motor-independent predictive mechanisms, which just highlight
other-produced events due to lower predictability of their onset and thus higher surprise. By
measuring the auditory-evoked N1 in an EEG experiment we show that self-generation of sounds
only leads to cortical attenuation when the onset of other-generated sounds is less predictable due to
the absence of any predictive cues. The presence of a preceding cue predicting the onset of auditory
stimuli, in contrast, led to a reversal of the attenuation effect, with lower N1 amplitudes for othergenerated sounds in contrast to self-generated sounds. Thus, contrary to prevalent assumptions
sensory attenuation is not bound to self-generation per se, but appears to be the result of motorindependent mechanisms. These results shed new light on the role of motor control and predictive
mechanisms for the processing of self- and other-produced sensory signals.

126

Contributions

Semantics determine the influence of allocentric information in
memory-guided reaching
Harun Karimpur & Katja Fiehler

Justus Liebig University Giessen, Experimental Psychology
harun.karimpur@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Interacting with objects requires us to represent spatial configurations in our environment. The extent
to which we encode objects for action relative to other objects (allocentrically) is determined by
contextual factors such as spatial object clusters and task-relevance. In a memory-guided reaching
task in virtual reality, we investigated whether objects that are not spatially but semantically clustered
also determine the influence of allocentric information. We placed objects from different semantic
clusters on a table. Participants encoded the objects while freely exploring the scene. After a brief
mask and a delay, the scene was briefly shown again (test scene) with one object missing.
Participants were asked to reach to the location of the missing object (reaching target) from memory
on an empty table. In the test scene, two objects which either belonged to the same (congruent) or a
different (incongruent) semantic cluster as the reaching target were shifted. In the baseline condition,
no object shift occurred. Reaching endpoints deviated in the direction of object shifts. These errors
were larger when semantically congruent as opposed to incongruent objects were shifted. We argue
that humans integrate higher-level information when interacting with objects. Semantic clustering
could be an efficient mechanism of representing objects for action.

Visuelle und akustische Ablenkung bei jungen und älteren
Autofahrern im Fahrsimulator – eine EEG-Studie
Melanie Karthaus, Edmund Wascher & Stephan Getzmann

Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors (IfADo), Department of Ergonomics
karthaus@ifado.de

Ablenkung ist ein großes Problem für die Verkehrssicherheit. Autofahrer sind einer Reihe von
akustischen und visuellen Ablenkreizen ausgesetzt, die ihnen während der Fahrt innerhalb und
außerhalb des Autos begegnen. Während einige dieser Reize wichtige Informationen enthalten und
sogar verhaltensrelevant sein können, sind andere Reize irrelevant und müssen ausgeblendet
werden. Die Fähigkeit zur Inhibition irrelevanter Reize kann jedoch mit zunehmendem Alter
beeinträchtigt sein. In der vorliegenden Studie untersuchten wir die Auswirkungen von akustischen
und visuellen Ablenkreizen während einer Fahrt im Fahrsimulator bei jungen (18-25 Jahre) und
älteren (55-65 Jahre) Autofahrern. Hierzu wurden Verhaltensdaten und neurophysiologische Maße
(EEG) in einer Fahraufgabe erfasst, bei der auf Seitenwind und Bremslichter voranfahrender
Fahrzeuge zu reagieren war. Visuelle Ablenkreize verursachen in beiden Altersgruppen längere
Reaktionszeiten als akustische Reize. Während die Spurhaltung der beiden Altersgruppen ähnlich
gut ist, zeigen sich eher Unterschiede in der Bremszeit und der Anzahl der Fahrfehler, die bei den
Älteren jeweils größer ausfallen. Darüber hinaus zeigt sich, dass die ereigniskorrelierten Potenziale,
welche die kognitive Verarbeitung der fahrrelevanten Reize abbilden (P3), durch die Ablenkreize
kleiner werden und dies vor allem in der Gruppe der älteren Autofahrer. Die Ergebnisse werden im
Rahmen der Theorie multipler Ressourcen und der Inhibitionshypothese diskutiert.

127

Contributions

Personal time-related life events influence the direction of whole-body
movements
Lydia Kastner1, Jennifer Müller2, Juan José Rahona López1, Peter Gerjets1 & Susana Ruiz Fernández1

Leibniz Institut für Wissensmedien, Multimodal Interaction Lab; 2Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, LEAD
Graduation School & Research Network
l.kastner@iwm-tuebingen.de
1

Grounded cognition literature suggests that the abstract concept of time is associated with the more
concrete concept of space (i.e., past association with backward and left; future association with
forward and right). A recent study also indicates that the past is associated with backward wholebody movements, whereas the future is associated with forward whole-body movements. Language
metaphors like “to leave the past behind” or “to approach the future” also support this association.
But can time influence the decision on where to move? To answer this question, 71 participants had
to place 9 past-related and 9 future-related personal life events on a square mat by performing free
whole-body movements. Participants could place their life events by moving to 8 possible directions
(i.e., forward-backward, left-right, and diagonal movements). Results showed that future life events
were more often associated with forward whole-body movements than past life events. In contrast,
past life events were more often associated with backward movements than future life events.
Additionally, a preference for a diagonal association of time was found, showing that future life
events were more often associated with forward-right whole-body movements and past life events
more often with backward-left movements.

Individual Alpha Frequency Relates to the Sound-Induced Flash Illusion
Julian Keil1 & Daniel Senkowski2

Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel, Biologische Psychologie; 2Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Klinik für
Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie
julian.keil@gmail.com

1

Ongoing neural oscillations reflect fluctuations of cortical excitability. A growing body of research
has underlined the role of neural oscillations for stimulus processing. Neural oscillations in the alpha
band have gained special interest in electrophysiological research on perception. Recent studies
proposed the idea that neural oscillations provide temporal windows in which sensory stimuli can be
perceptually integrated. This also includes multisensory integration. In the current high-density EEGstudy we examined the relationship between the individual alpha frequency (IAF) and cross-modal
audiovisual integration in the sound-induced flash illusion (SIFI). In 26 human volunteers we found a
negative correlation between the IAF and the SIFI illusion rate. Individuals with a lower IAF showed
higher audiovisual illusions. Source analysis suggested an involvement of the visual cortex, especially
the calcarine sulcus, for this relationship. Our findings corroborate the notion that the IAF influences
the crossmodal integration of auditory and visual stimuli in the SIFI.

128

Contributions

Contextualising information enhances the experience of
environmental art
Anna Keller & Florian Röser

University of Applied Sciences, Economic Psychology
florian.roeser@h-da.de

Environmental communication is a challenging job. Environmental problems such as climate change
or pollution often feel distant, hard to grasp, and temporally removed, making it difficult to create
awareness and motivate pro-environmental behaviour. Traditional methods (e.g. information
campaigns) have struggled to find enduring success, leading to alternative methods being tested.
Environmentally-themed art is among those being increasingly addressed in literature, with promising
results. However, as researchers begin to systematically study environmental art, influencing factors
must be addressed - for example, the effect of presenting contextualising information. In the present
study, 123 participants saw an environmental artwork with or without contextualising information in
a between-subjects design, and rated the artwork on various variables regarding its aesthetic value
and pro-environmental impact. Additionally, eye movement was recorded using mobile eye tracking
glasses to gain insight into the processing of the artwork. The results showed that information
presentation increased personal meaning and understanding, which was in turn associated with
liking, interest and the emotional response. Average fixation duration was significantly shorter (37ms) for participants in the information group, indicating easier processing due to the guidance of
the information. Implications for researchers and practitioners such as artists, curators and
environmental communicators will be discussed.

Weighting of vision and proprioception in post-stroke reach planning
Johannes Keyser1, Noël L. W. Keijsers2, Luc Selen1 & Pieter W. Medendorp1

Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University; 2Department of Research, Sint
Maartenskliniek Nijmegen
j.keyser@donders.ru.nl
1

To plan a goal-directed reach, the brain estimates the initial hand location by weighting visual and
proprioceptive signals. Sober & Sabes (2003) proposed a model of reach planning in two stages,
each with different sensory weightings for hand location estimation: One weighting to determine a
desired movement vector and one to generate a joint-based motor command. Fitting the model to
reach data of healthy subjects revealed that the sensory weighting is shifted towards vision during
movement vector planning, but shifted towards proprioception during motor command generation. In
our study, we quantify the weighting of vision and proprioception for reach planning in stroke
survivors and healthy controls. Participants perform a center-out reaching task, with each hand, in a
virtual reality setup that allows to shift the visual feedback of the hand. We extended Sober & Sabes'
model to compare the affected versus unaffected hands of stroke survivors and the dominant versus
non-dominant hands of control subjects. Our preliminary results show that the sensory weightings of
controls do not depend on hand dominance. We hypothesize that stroke survivors show deficient
sensory weightings with their affected hand, either during movement vector computation or during
motor command generation.

129

Contributions

Frontoparietal EEG phase coupling reflects the successful memory
encoding of constructed objects during maintenance in visual working
memory
Patrick H. Khader1, Frank Rösler2 & Julia A. Ewerdwalbesloh3

Brandenburg Medical School, Psychology; 2University of Hamburg, Psychology; 3Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität,
Department of Psychology
Patrick.Khader@mhb-fontane.de

1

How are mentally constructed images maintained in visual working memory (vWM)? And does this
maintenance pose a form of stimulus elaboration, promoting successful encoding into more
permanent memory traces? To investigate this, we designed a subsequent-memory study in which
participants maintained visual objects that they either had to construct from single parts or that were
presented as complete objects. Increased fronto-parietal-occipital EEG phase coupling was generally
found during the maintenance of constructed compared to non-constructed objects in the theta,
alpha, and gamma frequency bands. For increased construction load, i.e., when more object parts
had to be maintained, this pattern was restricted to fronto-parietal couplings, suggesting that the
fronto-parietal attention network is coping with increased attentional demands involved in
maintaining constructed images. Furthermore, this coupling pattern was also found for later
remembered in comparison to later forgotten objects. For alpha and beta, the effect dissociated
topographically for constructed vs. non-constructed objects, suggesting specific contributions to
encoding depending on the kind of elaborative processing in vWM. To conclude, fronto-parietal
phase coupling might be a neural implementation of an attentional control process the serves to keep
object elements together as a coherent vWM representation, and, in so doing, promotes memory
encoding.

Biased competition to account for task choice in self-organized task
switching
Andrea Kiesel1, Victor Mittelstädt1 & Jeff Miller2

Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg; 2University of Otago
kiesel@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
1

In a new variant of the voluntary task-switching procedure, we explored whether participants adapt
to individual task-switching performance limitations (i.e., switch costs) when deciding between task
repetitions and task switches. In this self-organized task-switching paradigm, participants see a
number and a letter stimulus in each trial and they can freely decide to perform the number
(smaller/larger five) or the letter (vowel/consonant) task. Critically, the stimulus belonging to the
chosen task appears delayed in the next trial and this delay increases with the number of task
repetitions. In the current experiments, we explored whether participants trade off switch costs
against the increasing waiting time for the stimulus needed for a task repetition. Several experiments
revealed that switch costs and task selections are related: The larger the switch costs, the less often
participants switched tasks. These results could be explained by assuming that participants
deliberately considered their individual switch costs when self-organizing their task selection
behavior. Alternatively, task selection might be determined by a between-task competition that is
biased by task recency and stimulus-task priming.

130

Contributions

Design factors (I): What influences trajectory curvature in mousetracking experiments?
Pascal J. Kieslich1, Martin Schoemann2, Tobias Grage2 & Stefan Scherbaum2

University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology; 2Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Psychology
kieslich@psychologie.uni-mannheim.de
1

The analysis of mouse movements to study cognitive processes is becoming increasingly popular in
many psychological research areas. When creating mouse-tracking experiments, researchers face a
number of design choices, for example, about the mouse speed, starting procedure, or response
indication. In previous research, many different settings have been employed, but so far little is
known about how these methodological differences affect mouse-tracking data. To address this, a
series of experiments was conducted to systematically investigate the influence of multiple design
factors. A classic mouse-tracking task was used for these experiments, in which participants classify
typical and atypical exemplars into one of two categories. In separate experiments, the design
factors response indication (click vs. touch), mouse sensitivity, screen aspect ratio, and starting
procedure were manipulated between participants. Across all experiments and design conditions,
the core finding that mouse trajectories deviate more towards the non-chosen option for atypical than
for typical exemplars was replicated. However, the strength of this effect, the curvature and the
distribution of the shape of individual trajectories was influenced by several design factors –
especially by the type of starting procedure and response indication. Implications for the design of
future mouse-tracking studies and possible recommendations are discussed.

PsyToolkit: Testing the replicability of web-based results in a
laboratory setting
Jonathan Daniel Kim1, Ute Gabriel1 & Pascal Gygax2

Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Psychology; 2University of Fribourg, Department
of Psychology
jonathan.kim@ntnu.no
1

This research examines the replicability of response and response times obtained through a webbased instrument PsyToolkit compared to a habitual laboratory setting (using E-prime 3.0). During a
cognitive-choice experiment participants were required to answer the question ‘Could [first name] be
one of the [role noun in plural form]’ (e.g, ‘Sam – Firefighter’). Thirty-six role nouns (12 masculine,
12 feminine, 12 non-stereotyped) and six names (3 males, 3 females) were utilised for this
experiment. Choice (i.e., yes/no responses) was analysed through a general linear mixed-effects
model, while response times were analysed through a linear mixed-effects model (with the lme4
package in R). No significant differences were found between PsyToolkit and Eprime for either
choice or response times, suggesting adequate replicability. However, response times variability was
considerably larger for results obtained through PsyToolkit compared to Eprime. We discuss this
latter variability in terms of its implications for futur work using web-based instruments to measure
response times.

131

Contributions

How mood affects processing of emotional adjectives in L1 and L2 an ERP study
Johanna M Kißler1 & Katarzyna Bromberek-Dyzman2

Bielefeld University, Department of Psychology, Affective Neuropsychology; 2Adam Mickiewicz University, Faculty
of English, Language and Communication Laboratory
johanna.kissler@uni-bielefeld.de

1

Processing affective language in one's second language (L2) has been suggested to be less
embodied than in one's native language (L1). Addressing this issue via a mood manipulation, we
investigate categorization of and ERPs elicited by positive, negative, or neutral adjectives presented
either in L1 (German) or L2 (English). Participants viewed short, emotionally evocative positive or
negative movie-excerpts and were then presented with series of adjectives. ERPs were recorded
while participants performed a valence decision task on the words. In L1, words were categorized
more often as positive or negative than as neutral, positive and negative not differing, whereas in L2
most words were categorized as positive. The N400 was larger in L1 than L2 and larger in negative
than in positive mood. On the late positive potential (LPP) an interaction was found: In L1,
particularly in positive mood, larger responses occurred for both positive and negative adjectives
compared to neutral ones. However, in L2, across moods largest LPPs were found for positive
adjectives. These results indicate reduced processing of negative content in L2, possibly as a result of
less embodied processing, contributing to a growing body of cross-linguistic ERP research on
emotional language processing.

Sensory Attenuation: Disentangling Expectancy and Agency Effects
Annika Laura Klaffehn, Lisa Weller, Katharina A Schwarz, Wilfried Kunde & Roland Pfister
University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology III
annika@klaffehn.net

Sensory attenuation describes the phenomenon that self-produced effects are perceived as less
pronounced than external events. But can this perceptual change indeed be attributed to differences
in agency or is it a by-product of the increased temporal predictability of self-produced events?
Agency and predictability are oftentimes confounded in experimental studies, and we therefore
present an experimental design to de-confound both variables. We measured sensory attenuation via
event-related potentials (ERPs) to self-produced and externally produced tones in two settings. In a
classic setting, the onset of self-produced tones was perfectly predictable whereas the onset of
externally produced tones was not. In a novel, predictive setting, predictability was parallelized by
cueing the onset of self-produced and externally produced tones by an informative temporal cue (a
progress bar filling on the screen). The classic conditions replicated sensory attenuation effects in
terms of N1 and P2 ERP components. Results from the predictive comparison still yielded some
evidence for attenuation of the N1 component for self-produced relative to externally produced
tones. We conclude that the N1 component of the auditory ERP is not solely dependent on certainty
of tone onset but appears indeed to be sensitive to agency.

132

Contributions

Predicting how we grasp arbitrary objects
Lina Katharina Klein1, Guido Maiello1, Juan Chen2, Vivian Charlotte Paulun1, Jody C Culham2 &
Roland W Fleming1
Justus-Liebig University Giessen, Department of Psychology; 2University of Western Ontario, Department of
Psychology Brain and Mind Institute
Lina.K.Klein@psychol.uni-giessen.de

1

We investigated the computations underlying visually guided grasp selection for three-dimensional
objects of non-uniform materials, and the brain areas involved in this process. In behavioral
experiments, 26 participants picked up objects composed of 10 cubes (individual cubes made of
wood or brass, side length 2.5 cm) in various configurations to test how an object's threedimensional shape and material properties affect grasp locations. The results reveal that grasping is
highly regular, constrained, and consistent across participants. Specifically, grasp locations are
systematically affected by weight as well as mass distribution, the length of the reach trajectory, the
subject’s natural grip axis, and the presence of handles. We employed these findings to build a very
accurate grasp selection model. Based on the model’s predictions we chose new shapes onto which
we pre-selected a subset of grasps designed to tease apart the different components of visual grasp
selection. To study which brain areas are involved in grasping we then placed 2 participants in an
fMRI scanner and recorded their BOLD activity while grasping these novel objects varying in material
properties at the pre-selected grasp points. Thus, by combining behavioral data, computational
modelling, and fMRI we can predict how humans grasp objects.

Efficiency and Aesthetics of E-Commerce Results
Anica Kleinjan1 & Stefan Brandenburg2

CONTACT Software GmbH; 2Technische Universität Berlin, Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics
stefan.brandenburg@tu-berlin.de
1

E-commerce became more importance in recent years. About 40% of the customers’ state that they
prefer online shopping over retail shopping. Good user experience and a positive perception of the
online shop are important factors for the success of an e-commerce business. A significant part of an
online shop is the result list that appears when users search for items. The present paper examines
the search efficiency and perceived aesthetics of two different e-commerce result lists, grid or list
design. A grid design shows more than one item in a row and a list design has one item in a row.
Grid vs. list design, number of items and the presence or absence of a target item were manipulated.
Reaction times and perceived aesthetics ratings were assessed. Results show that the grid design
leads to a lower reaction time than the list design. This effect is affected by the number of items
shown and the presence or absence of a target. In addition, the grid design is more aesthetic than
the list design regarding simplicity, versatility and artistry. The results replicate and supplement
results found in previous studies.

133

Contributions

Eye movements reveal task-driven information search in memory
during sequential diagnostic reasoning
Anja Klichowicz1, Sascha Stehlau2, Josef F. Krems1 & Agnes Scholz3

Technische Universität Chemnitz, Department of Psychology; 2University of Kassel, Department of Psychology;
University of Zurich, Department of Psychology
anja.klichowicz@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de

1
3

Causal reasoning is the complex process of finding explanations for an information. The evaluation
of a cause depends on a multimodal memory representation of the problem. Part of that
representation has to be retrieved to find an explanation. However, it is unclear if information
retrieval differs depending on the explanatory value of the new information. In an experiment (N =
29) participants solved a sequential reasoning task where critical information had to be retrieved
from memory during 48 trials (Black-Box-task, Johnson & Krems, 2001). We manipulated whether it
is possible to explain new evidence based on previous information. By use of eye-tracking measures,
we tracked the search for information from memory. If new evidence is already explained,
participants tend to look at these explanations. This is conform to the Theory of Abductive Reasoning
(TAR, Johnson & Krems, 2001) which predicts that previous explanations are used to concretize an
abstract hypothesis. In contrast, if evidence cannot be explained right away, participants tried to
integrate the information with previous evidence resulting in more eye movements to the information
location than to previous explanations. Implications to process assumptions in sequential diagnostic
reasoning are discussed.

Dynamics of the mimetic crisis in students
Laura Klimecki, Markus Maier & Vanessa Büchner
LMU Munich, Department of Psychology
laura.klimecki@outlook.com

Background. According to Girard's Mimetic Theory (1979), human motivation is driven by imitative
(mimetic) desires: Namely, when two individuals ("actor" & "model") realize shared interest in an
item ("object") that has a finite quality. This provokes a rivalry or aggression that is preconscious in
nature. The current study serves as a conceptual replication of recent work by Maier & colleagues
(unpublished), in which the authors empirically induced this "mimetic crisis" in adults, and found that
compared to controls, subjects in the experimental condition systematically demonstrated greater
levels of subsequent aggressive attitudes and behaviors. Our study aimed to replicate and extend
findings to the student population. Methods & Results. N=150 students attending university in Munich
volunteered to participate in the study, and were randomly allocated to the control or test conditions.
All subjects also completed an online survey, including the Trait and State Aggression
Questionnaires (Buss & Perry, 1992), and the Picture Frustration Test (Rosenzweig, 1948). Multiple
regression analyses supported the predicted model, corroborating previous findings. Our work
speaks to the motivation literature, invoking frustration and aggression as potentially important
constructs for understanding the mimetic crisis in students.

134

Contributions

Does the frequency of the background color influence the aesthetic
judgment of object pictures?
Jenny Kloster, Stefan Blaschke & Bettina Rolke
University of Konstanz, Department of Psychology
jenny.kloster@uni-konstanz.de

Previous research suggests that arousal influences our aesthetic judgment of objects. We investigated
whether the allocation of attention towards an object also affects the aesthetic judgment. To this end,
we presented black pieces of furniture (chairs and tables) on either blue or green background and
manipulated the frequency of the background color. In the first phase of the experiment, participants
were asked for a speeded discrimination concerning the furniture type. In the second phase, these
familiar pieces of furniture were intermixed with new ones and all occurred on white background.
Participants rated their aesthetic impression and their familiarity with the objects. Because the
infrequent background color should capture attention, we hypothesized that objects presented on this
color should be processed faster and memorized better than those presented on the frequent
background color. Even though there was no advantage for objects presented on infrequent
background color in RT and familiarity ratings, they were judged as more aesthetic than those
presented on frequent color. We assume that the infrequent background color was implicitly
associated with the objects and that this information became relevant when judging the aesthetic
value of object pictures. Summarized, our results show that attention influences our aesthetic
evaluation.

Visual processing capacity in multiple sclerosis: experimental
induction of cognitive fatigue based on a ‘theory of visual attention’
(TVA)
Steffen Kluckow1, Philipp M Berg2, Matthias Schwab1, Otto Witte1 & Peter Bublak1
Jena University Hospital; 2Philipps University Marburg
steffen.kluckow@med.uni-jena.de

1

Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a chronic demyelinating disease of the central nervous system. Up to 75%
of all MS patients suffer from cognitive impairments and describe fatigue (“subjective lack of
physical/mental energy”) as their most burdening restriction. A recent study (Kluckow et al., 2016)
showed that both aspects can be grasped by parametric estimates based on a ‘theory of visual
attention’ (TVA; Bundesen, 1990). Due to its diffuse definitions and mainly subjective measures,
however, objective fatigue assessment is still challenging. The current study investigated the causality
between the TVA-Parameter processing speed and objective fatigue. 10 MS patients and 10
matched controls were tested in a whole report task before and after inducing fatigue with a
vigilance task. In addition, fatigue and sleepiness questionnaires were conducted along with the test
procedures. Both MS and control subjects reported increased subjective sleepiness after fatigue
induction. However, TVA-based whole report revealed decrements of parameter C, the visual
processing rate, after fatigue induction only in MS patients. These results corroborate that this
parameter C represents a valid index of objective fatigue in MS patients. Furthermore, the visual
processing rate may display a sensitive indicator for the disease severity of this neurodegenerative
pathology.

135

Contributions

Temporal Movement Primitive Perception under Naturalistic Conditions
Benjamin Knopp, Moritz Schubert & Dominik Endres
University of Marburg, Department of Psychology
knoppbe@staff.uni-marburg.de

Background: Movement Primitives (MP) are hypothetical elements out of which complex movements
can be composed. This concept is popular in motor control, but we are interested in MPs as
perceptual categories: inspired by the common-coding theory, we investigated if MPs are also a
useful approach for describing human movement perception in naturalistic settings. Besides
understanding movement perception, finding perceptual MP categories could also be useful for
computer-vision/graphics and modelling. Data: We recorded an actor performing natural tasks in a
fairly unconstrained manner. The actions consist of walking through an indoor environment, stair
climbing, making/drinking coffee. The data was used for a psychophysical movement segment
perception experiment and for learning MP models. We showed 70 video clips containing a
selection of recordings to 12 participants. They were instructed to segment these clips into nonoverlapping time intervals according to perceived boundaries. Results: We then used the
segmentations of each participant for the extraction of MPs. Using the Bayesian Information
Criterion, we estimated that 6-15 MPs are optimal for a given participant. Furthermore, we did a
cluster analysis to compare global and local representations. The results indicate that taskindependent MPs provide a better representation of human movement than task-dependent ones.

Spatial compatibility effects in whole-body movements: expertise and
movement specificity?
Dirk Koester, Christoph Schütz & Thomas Schack
Bielefeld University/CITEC
dkoester@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de

Rapid and proper responses are of particular importance in many sporty situations, e.g., regarding
shots on goal in handball. Here, we tested how basic action control principles (spatial stimulus
response compatibilities), typically examined by means of simple reactions (e.g., button press
responses); can be generalized to ecologically valid situations. Nineteen participants (novices; 24,6
years; 12 female) conducted a spatial compatibility task in which they had to react as a (pretended)
handball goalkeeper to a throw of an attacker with a whole-body defense movement while their
body movement was recorded. Also simple reactions (button press) were recorded in a further block.
Preliminary analyses show a compatibility effect for simple (t18=9,0; p<.0001) and for complex
reactions (button for defence goal; t18=4,7; p<.001). A compatibility effect during the movement
was found in the movement onset (t18=2,74; p<.05) and the amplitude (t18=2,97; p<.01). The
compatibility effect can be shown in different but not all parameters of (whole-body) movements. In a
further experiment with shots on goals (football) we examined the specificity of the effects for the
movement technique vs.the influence of a motor expertise. These data suggest that the action control
principle can be generalized to ecologically valid situations. This offers new research perspectives
through continuous measures of behaviour instead of summed up parameters such as reaction times.

136

Contributions

The Influence of Plausibility Variation on Moral Dilemma Judgments
Anita Körner & Roland Deutsch

Universität Würzburg, Lehrstuhl für Psychologie II
anita.koerner@uni-wuerzburg.de

In moral dilemma judgements, participants are presented with information about a hypothetical
situation and are then asked to decide between two options. They have to decide whether or not it is
appropriate to sacrifice a human life in order to maximize aggregate welfare. However, the
judgment requires that participants accept the closed world assumptions for the dilemma—
specifically, the statements that (1) both options definitely yield the stated consequences and (2) there
is no other (better) option. However, for some of the dominantly used dilemmas, these assumptions
seem implausible to many participants. In the present research, we examined whether variations in
plausibility systematically influence moral dilemma judgements. Using reactance theory and
expectancy-value theory, we predicted that reduced plausibility would reduce the willingness to
endorse sacrificing a human life. In two experiments, we manipulated the plausibility of the stated
consequences and the statement that there is no alternative action. As predicted, lower dilemma
plausibility reduced sacrificial judgements, even though relevant information about the dilemma
(e.g., number of people involved and nature of the sacrificial action) was constant. These results
indicate that the predominantly used moral dilemmas contain unsuspected sources of variance that
can systematically distort moral dilemma judgments.

Matching virtual workplaces with cognitive styles: Exposing users
with different cognitive styles to data models of alternative
complexity
Ivana Kovacevic1 & Dusan Vujosevic2

Belgrade University, Faculty of Organizational Sciences, Department of Human Resource Management (and Social
Sciences); 2Union University, Faculty of computer science
kivana@fon.bg.ac.rs

1

While some previous studies did offer the proofs for a superior usability of computer interfaces which
were coherent with a business user’s cognitive style, some other did not. Participants in our
experiment were asked to perform 12 tasks, six in one and six in the another virtual workplace.
These virtual workplaces were based on the two dominant approaches to data modelling from the
business databases practice. Users’ cognitive styles were determined using the Royce`s conception of
epistemic profiles and his scales of rationalism, empiricism and metaphorism. Obtained results show
that the order of exposition of the two virtual workplaces do matter for the metaphorical style, where
the rate of accurate answers drops for the less complex workplace when it is the second in
experiment, probably due to some kind of fatigue. For the empiricism, the solving time increases for
the complex workplace when it is the first exposed, which could be seen as a confirmation for the
assumption that this cognitive style is dependent on the effect of training. The prevalence of
rationalism in a user improves his efficiency in the more complex workplace, when second exposed,
possibly due to already accumulated problem-solving skills.

137

Contributions

Stick to your goals! The influence of current action goals on affective
responses increases after stress
Julia Kozlik1, Roland Neumann2, Franziska Plessow3 & Rico Fischer1

University of Greifswald, Psychological Institute; 2University of Trier, Psychological Institute; 3Harvard Medical
School, Neuroendocrine Unit
julia.kozlik@uni-greifswald.de

1

Acute stress seems to increase goal shielding resulting in enhanced perseveration. Here we
investigated whether this would also apply to affective processing contexts which are thought to
trigger relatively stable natural response tendencies. Do individuals in stressful situations even stick to
current action goals when these counteract their naturally activated responses? To test this
participants were either exposed to a stress- or no-stress-induction phase. Afterwards, we applied an
affective Simon task that required to categorize a non-valent feature of affective pictures by voluntary
facial muscle contractions (zygomaticus vs. corrugator). To manipulate action goals, we randomly
intermixed a second task (i.e., valence categorization) for which participants either received a
congruent (positive – zygomaticus; negative – corrugator) or incongruent stimulus-response mapping
(negative – zygomaticus; positive – corrugator). We observed significant reductions of the affective
Simon effect for participants that pursued incongruent (compared to congruent) action goals.
Importantly, this effect was stronger in the stressed group. These results indicate that stressed
participants rigorously stick to current action goals even though these are in opposition to their
natural response tendencies. Importantly, these findings are in line with our hypothesis of increased
goal shielding and challenge the widely believed idea that stress promotes habitual behavior.

Cortical underpinnings of geometrical gaze following – an fMRI study
Peter Maximilian Kraemer1, Goerner Marius2, Hamidreza Ramezanpour2, Peter Dicke2 & Peter Thier2
University of Basel, Department for Decision Neuroscience; 2Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Department
for Cognitive Neurology
peter.kraemer@unibas.ch

1

Following the eye gaze of others is a key step towards establishing joint attention, allowing two
individuals to attend to the same object. Despite gaze following being a bottom up process to a
large extent, there is also evidence suggesting a role of contextual and top down knowledge. This
becomes relevant when eye vergence information is not sufficient for singling out one target object,
the other individual is looking at. While the assessment of eye gaze direction has been attributed to
a region in the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), it remains unclear, where relevant top
down information is processed. In an fMRI experiment, subjects decided among several objects, at
which a stimulus face was most likely looking at. The objects were spatially arranged on the same
axis so that merely relying on gaze direction would lead to ambiguous conclusions. Additional
contextual cues either helped to disambiguate the configuration, (facilitating the selection of the
target) or compromised it. We found regions in the inferior frontal lobe (IFL) and the posterior
parietal cortex (PPC) which were modulated by the level of ambiguity. A time course analysis
revealed that the IFG preceded PPC activity, starting early enough to mediate target selection.

138

Contributions

Effects of action on cortical BOLD responses in multisensory, simulated
self-motion
Milosz Krala1, Bianca van Kemenade2 & Frank Bremmer1

Dept. Neurophysics and Marburg Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior - MCMBB, University of Marburg;
Translational Neuroimaging Marburg and Marburg Center for Mind, Brain and Behavior - MCMBB, University of
Marburg
milosz.krala@physik.uni-marburg.de
1
2

Navigation through an environment is both inherently multisensory and mediated by one’s own
action. In a fMRI paradigm we aimed to identify the neural substrate underlying the multisensory
processing of self-controlled self-motion. Visual stimuli simulated straight-ahead self-motion across a
ground plane. Auditory stimuli were pure sinusoidal tones, whose frequency scaled with simulated
speed of self-motion. The subjects’ task was to reproduce (active condition) a previously seen selfdisplacement (passive condition). Subjects had full control over travel speed, using an MRIcompatible gamepad. We recorded the trajectories of self-motion during the active condition and
played it back to subjects in another set of trials (replay condition). We presented a combination of
unimodal visual, auditory and bimodal stimuli. Comparing active and replay condition, i.e. the two
conditions with identical sensory stimulation, we found enhanced BOLD responses in respective
primary sensory cortices during purely visual, auditory and bimodal stimulation. Bilaterally, the
angular gyri showed suppressed BOLD responses which correlated negatively with the subjects’ error
in distance reproduction. We propose that continuous monitoring of action consequences increases
BOLD responses in primary sensory areas. Furthermore, our results are in line with the idea of the
angular gyrus as comparator for action-related predictions and sensory outcomes.

Infants’ gaze patterns for same-race and other-race faces, and the
other-race effect
Anna Krasotkina & Gudrun Schwarzer

Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Department of Developmental Psychology
anna.krasotkina@psychol.uni-giessen.de

The other-race effect (ORE) is characterized by poor discrimination of faces from ethnicities other
than one’s own ethnicity. Previous research has shown that the ORE emerges at approximately 9
months. The exact origin of the ORE, however, is still under discussion. One possible explanation is
that infants adopt a specialized gaze strategy for recognizing own-race faces, which may be
suboptimal for other-race faces. The goal of our study was to test whether the ORE is linked to
different gaze-patterns used by infants during habituation to same- and other-race faces. We
habituated 60 Caucasian 9-month-old infants to a Caucasian or Asian female face and preferencetested them with a novel Caucasian or Asian face, respectively. We found that infants looked
significantly longer at the novel Caucasian face but not at the novel Asian face, indicating the ORE.
While habituating to Caucasian faces, infants maintained high fixation proportions towards the
eyes, and significantly increased fixation on the mouth. Conversely, while habituating to Asian faces,
they significantly decreased fixation proportion towards the eyes and increased fixation towards the
external face features. Thus, our results suggest that the ORE is connected with different gaze
strategies used by infants for recognizing same- and other-race faces.

139

Contributions

Do robots dream of electric stereotypes? - Effects of gender-specific
work stereotypes on trust in humanoid service robots
Johannes Maria Kraus

Ulm University, Department Human Factors
johannes.kraus@uni-ulm.de

Robots are becoming a part of everyday life. This makes it necessary to equip them with
understandable and trustable interaction concepts. A common strategy is the employment of
anthropomorphic features to provoke more human-like interaction. In the presented study, explicit
(name and voice) and implicit gender (personality) of a service robot was manipulated. 40
participants answered questions in both a stereotypical male and female work domain (taxi ordering
vs. babysitting). After every question they received feedback by a NAO robot. The interaction was
evaluated two times during the task. Implicit gender (personality) had a significant effect on trust and
likeability in the male task. The male personality robot was trusted more and perceived as more
reliable and competent, while the female one was rated as more likeable. In the female task, no
significant effects of gender stereotypes were found. Furthermore, no significant gender stereotypes
were found for the explicit gender. These findings indicate that gender stereotypes generalize to
human-robot interaction and that they are of relevance for work context.

Mental rotation in basketball: Presenting playing patterns in different
orientations of the tactic board affects players’ observation time and
execution performance under temporal constraints
Daniel Krause, Matthias Rahlenbeck & Matthias Weigelt
University of Paderborn, Psychology and Movement Science
daniel.krause@upb.de

In basketball, tactical instructions are presented on tactic boards under temporal constraints (e.g., 20
second time outs). Therefore, these instructions should be presented in a way that enables fast and
errorless visual-spatial information processing. For 32 participants (all novices, 16 female), we
scrutinized the effects of different tactic board orientations (i.e. five different spatial disparities
relative to the players’ on-court perspective) on observation time and on-court performance (i.e.
playing pattern execution) under different temporal constraints (self-paced vs. time-pressure). While
the Self-paced Group (SpG; n=16) determined the observation time in a self-controlled manner, the
Time-pressure Group (TpG; n=16) was given only seven seconds of observation time for each
playing pattern. The results for the SpG showed that the self-chosen observation time during
instruction was significantly longer and the playing pattern execution accuracy on court decreased
for larger spatial disparities between tactic board orientation and players’ on-court perspective.
Regarding the spatial disparity effect on on-court performance, the TpG did not differ significantly,
but was overall less accurate than the SpG during playing pattern execution. These results can be
explained by higher cognitive costs that arise during the mental rotation of visual-spatial information
from the tactic board into the players’ on-court perspective.

140

Contributions

Parameter collision in probabilistic models of cognition: How to
separate parameterization of evidence strength and choice noise
Antonia Krefeld-Schwalb1, Thorsten Pachur2 & Benjamin Scheibehenne1

University of Geneva, Geneva School of Economics and Management; 2Max Planck Institute for Human
Development
antonia.Krefeld-Schwalb@unige.ch
1

In the cognitive sciences, the use of computational models to disentangle psychological factors
underlying behavior is wide-spread. In these models, it is often assumed that behavior results from a
probabilistic selection among alternatives (e.g., memory traces, risky options, categories). The
evidence strength for each of these alternatives is governed by one or more parameters; in addition,
there is often a parameter governing how deterministically a choice follows from the relative
evidence strength of the alternatives. Conceptually, the characteristics of these processes (i.e., how
evidence strength is computed and how noisy the selection process is) are independent. As we
highlight, however, due to formal characteristics of the models the parameters representing these
characteristics are usually highly correlated, complicating their independent interpretability. We
demonstrate this problem for several influential cognitive models, such as cumulative prospect theory
for risky choice, the generalized context model for categorization, the SIMPLE model for memory,
and the expectancy valence model for decisions from experience. We explore the implications of
these parameter intercorrelations and suggest approaches to reduce them. For instance, we show
that changing the functional form of the value functions substantially decreases the parameter
intercorrelations.

What’s past is past: Neither perceptual or semantic preactivation nor
prior motivational relevance decrease subsequent inattentional
blindness
Carina Kreitz1, Robert Schnürch2, Philip Furley1, Henning Gibbons2 & Daniel Memmert1

Deutsche Sporthochschule Köln, Institut für Trainingswissenschaft und Sportinformatik; 2Universität Bonn, Institut für
Psychologie
c.kreitz@dshs-koeln.de
1

We are susceptible to failures of awareness if a stimulus occurs unexpectedly and our attention is
focused elsewhere. Such inattentional blindness is highly ecologically valid and modulated by
various parameters, including stimulus attributes and the observer’s attentional set regarding the
primary task. In four behavioral experiments (N = 640) we investigated whether previous events and
experiences determine whether or not inattentional blindness occurs. Using a simple two-phase
paradigm, we found that the likelihood of missing an unexpected object due to inattention did not
change when its defining characteristic (its color) was perceptually preactivated. Likewise, noticing
rates were not significantly increased if the object’s color was semantically preactivated: Neither
explicitly mentioning the color several times prior to the occurrence of the unexpected stimulus nor
priming the color more implicitly via color-related concepts could significantly reduce the
susceptibility to inattentional blindness. The interpretation that these findings reflect the rather general
principle that preactivations that are not motivationally relevant for one’s current selection goals do
not suffice to make an unexpected object overcome the threshold of awareness was overthrown by a
fourth experiment: Noticing rates were not significantly increased if the object’s color was previously
motivationally relevant during an unrelated detection task.

141

Contributions

Regulatory focus and propositional processing: Prevention focus
bolsters negation processing
Anand Krishna1 & Fritz Strack2

University of Würzburg, Department for Emotional and Motivational Psychology; 2University of Würzburg,
Department for Social Psychology
krishna@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de

1

Regulatory focus (Higgins, 1997) has been shown to affect many aspects of motivation and
cognition. Prevention focus in particular increases the likelihood of effortful processing (e.g. Pham &
Avnet, 2004). From the perspective of several dual-process theories (e.g. Strack & Deutsch, 2004),
propositional processing is more effortful than associative processing. Therefore, prevention focus
may increase the effect of propositional processes on judgements. Negation, i.e. the transformation
of a concept into its logical opposite, is a propositional operation that a prevention focus might
augment particularly strongly due to its connection to avoidance and eliminating possibilities (e.g.
Mourali & Pons, 2008). Four experiments (total N = 415) provide evidence that a chronic
prevention focus increases negation effects in an AMP (cf. Deutsch et al., 2009), especially when
augmented by a situational prevention focus. The effect is shown to be robust over two stimulus sets
and two manipulations of regulatory focus. In addition, preliminary evidence is presented that the
effect may reflect increased correspondence between implicit and explicit attitudes as measured by
the AMP. These studies provide the first empirical evidence for improved negation processing in a
prevention focus, which may in turn explain many phenomena found in prior studies.

On putting ‘cap to pen’ or ‘pen to cap’: A cross-linguistic comparison
of motion expressions, and gaze and memory behaviors in German
and Korean speakers
Alexandra Kroiss

University of Vienna, Department of Linguistics
alexandra.kroiss@univie.ac.at

This study investigates the typological and grammatical influence of language (German and Korean)
on linguistic expressions, visual perception (measured by eye movements), and recognition of caused
spatial events. In German, a satellite-framed language, Path of motion is lexicalized in satellites,
whereas in Korean, a verb-framed language, Path is typically lexicalized in the verb root. We tested
German and Korean native speakers in a linguistic description task as well as in a memory task
involving eye tracking. Our results show that both verbal (linguistic expressions) and nonverbal
(memory performance, eye movements) behaviors are determined at least in part by languagespecific grammar. While Korean speakers principally categorize spatial relationships according to
degree of fitness, German speakers do so based on containment or support. Language-specific
effects are also found in the looking behavior: While Korean speakers spend equal amounts of time
looking at the Figure and the Ground, German speakers pay more attention to the Figure object.
Regarding memory performance, Korean speakers’ error rate in identifying which object moved is
higher compared to German speakers. Our findings show that conceptual representation of Figure
and Ground, fundamental elements of motion events, are significantly influenced by the grammatical
structures of the speakers’ native language.

142

Contributions

The influence of mood on memory for happy and sad faces
Meike Kroneisen

University of Koblenz-Landau
kroneisen@uni-landau.de

Facial identification is important because it informs us regarding how to react to an approaching
person, who might be friend or foe. In social situations, the emotional expressions of faces are
important and very salient aspects of nonverbal communication. Previous work has shown that the
facial expression (happy or angry) influences the memory of this face in a later recognition test. It is
possible that positive expressions facilitate facial processing, therefore, more cognitive resources are
available to process facial identity. Research on mood dependent memory shows that the likelihood
of recalling something is higher when encoding and retrieval moods match than when they
mismatch. We wanted to examine whether memory for positive and negative faces is influenced by
the emotional state of the participant. Therefore, we presented our participants facial photographs
with different expressions (happy vs. sad). Half of our participants saw a sad video clip before the
presentation of the photographs. A later recognition test indicated that old-new discrimination but not
source memory is affected by whether a face was presented with a happy or a sad expression.
However, a different pattern reveals when the emotion-al state of the participant was manipulated.

The Theory of Visual Attention: A model of endogenous and
exogenous influences in prior entry
Alexander Krüger & Ingrid Scharlau

Paderborn University
alexander.krueger@uni-paderborn.de

Visual prior-entry describes the phenomenon that an attended stimulus is perceived earlier than an
unattended stimulus. Exogenous and endogenous attentional manipulations affect prior entry. This
phenomenon becomes evident in the temporal-order judgment (TOJ) paradigm. The TOJ has recently
been modeled in terms of Bundesen’s Theory of Visual Attention (TVA) that conceptualizes visual
perception as biased competition. This competition is mathematically modeled as a race for
representation. Thus, TVA explains visual prior-entry in TOJ as a special case of this mathematical
race model. Whereas endogenous attentional biases have always been a part of TVA a parameter
for exogenous attentional influences has only recently been added. So, it should be possible to
distinguish, quantify and compare endogenous and exogenous attentional manipulations in prior
entry with a TVA-based model. Particularly, TVA predicts an interaction between both parameters. In
this talk, we present a modeling and empirical approach that provides a quantitative estimation of
endogenous and exogenous attentional components and their interaction in TOJs. Thereby, checking
TVA’s predictions.

143

Contributions

A response-selection training helps 2.5-year-olds to solve intuitive
physics tasks
Markus Krüger, Friederike Kracht & Horst Krist
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universität Greifswald
markuskr@uni-greifswald.de

In certain cognitive tasks, infants apparently outperform toddlers and even kindergartners. A possible
explanation for this phenomenon might be the way competencies are assessed. While infants are
usually tested with Violation-of-Expectation paradigms, older children are presented with verbal or
action tasks. When asked to appraise the physical support of objects, for example, 2-year-olds fail
completely in an action task (Krist, Krüger, & Buttelmann, 2017). However, when 2-year-olds are
tested with eye-tracking measures, they partially consider support adequately (Krist, Atlas, Fischer, &
Wiese, in press). One factor that probably affects performance in this context is the extrinsic
cognitive load imposed by task demands (Keen, 2003). One such task demand is assumed to be the
requirement to select a response. To examine the potential impact of this factor, we tested whether a
response-selection training would improve 2.5-year-olds’ performance in a physical support task.
One group of children was trained to answer questions about animals in the same format they were
later asked about physical support. A control group received no training. Performance in the support
task was above chance level for the training group only. Therefore, further testing the possible
influence of task demands on intuitive physics tasks is justified.

The effect of Working-Memory demands on task-order coordination in
DT situations
Sebastian Kübler1, Tilo Strobach2 & Torsten Schubert3

Martin-Luther Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Institut für Psychologie; Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für
Psychologie; 2MSH Medical School Hamburg, Fakultät für Humanwissenschaften; 3Martin-Luther Universität HalleWittenberg, Institut für Psychologie
kueblese@hu-berlin.de

1

Dual-task (DT) situations are characterized by the requirement for additional task-order coordination
processes that regulate the processing order of two temporally overlapping tasks. These TOC
processes can be investigated when participants perform DT blocks with a variable order of both
tasks. Performance is usually improved on trials in which both tasks are processed in the same order
relative to the preceding trial (same-order trial) compared to trials in which the processing order of
both tasks differs relative to the previous trial (different-order trial). In two experiments, we tested the
hypothesis that this performance benefit for same-order trials results from task-order priming based on
an order trace of the previous trial stored in Working Memory (WM). Participants performed a DT in
random-order DT blocks while demands on WM were manipulated by increasing the number of
stimulus-response bindings (Experiment 1) or implementing an additional updating task into the
experimental paradigm (Experiment 2). We found that the performance benefit for same-order trials
was reduced when demands on WM were increased. This result is in line with the assumption that
the order of two tasks in DT situations can be prepared based on order-information from the previous
trial which is stored in WM.

144

Contributions

Lexical access on behalf of task partner: electrophysiological insights
from Joint Picture Naming
Anna Katharina Kuhlen & Rasha Abdel Rahman

Neurokognitive Psychologie, Institut für Psychologie, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin
anna.kuhlen@hu-berlin.de

When naming a sequence of pictures, naming latencies increase with each new picture of a given
semantic category, so-called cumulative semantic interference. We have demonstrated that naming
latencies not only increase in response to speakers’ own prior naming of pictures, but also in
response to their task partner naming pictures (Kuhlen & Abdel Rahman, 2017). Here we investigate
the electrophysiological underpinnings of this effect. EEG was recorded from 30 participants who
believed to be naming pictures together with a remote task partner. We observed an increased
posterior positivity around 250-400ms, which corresponds to an increase in naming latencies and
has been taken to reflect lexical selection. Unlike our previous studies, only a subset of subjects
showed partner-elicited interference. Crucially, this group of subjects showed a stronger increase in
posterior positivity when semantic categories were co-named with the partner (vs. named alone), and
only these subjects showed a similar posterior positivity when the partner named a picture (vs. when
nobody named it). This suggests that these subjects simulated lexical access on behalf of their
partner. In conclusion, our study connects partner-elicited cumulative semantic interference to
electrophysiological underpinnings, yielding promising insights into the processes of language
production in social settings.

Age-Related Differences in Metacognitive Monitoring and Control
When Preparing for Recall
Beatrice G. Kuhlmann

University of Mannheim
kuhlmann@psychologie.uni-mannheim.de

Age-related memory differences are more pronounced on recall than on recognition tests. Two
experiments examined whether older adults are aware of recall’s particular difficulty (metacognitive
monitoring) and adapt strategies accordingly (metacognitive control). Young (18-30 years) and older
(60-87 years) participants either expected a recognition or a recall test while encoding word lists.
Whereas young adults had adequate test-difficulty monitoring already after reading format
descriptions, older adults needed practice with the format. Recall-expecting young adults consistently
(on both test formats) outperformed their recognition-expecting peers. Recall patterns indicated that
recall-expecting young adults engaged more inter-item relational processing, both of adjacent
unrelated study items (E1) and of distant semantically-related items (E2). For older adults, recallexpectancy effects were mixed: There was consistently no effect on recognition but improved recall
of unrelated (E1) but not of semantically-related (E2) words. Recall patterns suggested that recallexpecting older adults did not engage more relational processing of adjacent items in E1 but
unsuccessfully tried to use semantic clustering in E2. Thus, there are qualitative differences in how
young and older adults prepare for recall and whether older adults can successfully prepare for
recall depends on the study material.

145

Contributions

The limits of implicit sequence learning
Anja Kühnel

Medical School Berlin, Allgemeine Psychologie
anja.kuehnel@medicalschool-berlin.de

The study aims to search for the limits of implicit sequence learning. If subjects are confronted with a
serial reaction time paradigm in which stimulus processing does neither require the spatial attention
nor the motor learning system, implicit learning should not take place. This was reseached with a
serial reaction time task in which participants were asked to read aloud colour words. The words
were arranged in a second order conditional sequence and interrupted by a second sequence
presented just once per block. The results show that implicit sequence learning is not detectable in
the reaction times or error rates. To control for an inability to detect implicit sequence learning
through these measures a transfer condition was introduced in which participants had to name
colour patches following the same sequence. This condition at least hints at the possibility to learn
implicitly. The described experiment was able to show that the spatial attention and motor learning
system seem to be crucial for at least the detection of implicit sequence learning although they might
not be entirely necessary to learn implicitly.

Dissociating Intentional and Unintentional Learning Effects in
Evaluative Conditioning
Niels Kukken & Mandy Hütter

Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen
niels.kukken@uni-tuebingen.de

Evaluative conditioning describes the change in liking for an initially neutral stimulus (CS) after being
paired with an already valent stimulus (unconditioned stimulus; US). In everyday life however, we
rarely encounter US-CS pairings in isolation. Rather, the pairing is often accompanied by a
functional predicate that describes how the US and CS are related. For example, police officers
often co-occur with breaking the law (association), but only because they stop people from breaking
it (implication). Using a process-dissociation approach, we investigated how memory for the
association and the implication of the CS predict the change in liking of a CS: Participants were
instructed to learn US-CS pairings (positive or negative) together with a functional predicate (stop or
start; Moran & Bar-Anan, 2013). In a subsequent memory task, participants were instructed to report
the implication of the CS (for example, CSs that stop a negative sound have a positive implication).
We show that when participants do not intentionally report the implication of the stimulus, they
unintentionally respond in line with the US-CS coupling. Furthermore, we demonstrate that both
intentional and unintentional responses uniquely predict the change in liking of a CS. Theoretical
and practical implications will be discussed.

146

Contributions

Disarming the Gunslinger effect: Reaction beats intention for
cooperative actions
Wilfried Kunde, Lisa Weller & Roland Pfister
University of Wuerzburg
wilfried.kunde@uni-wuerzburg.de

According to famous physicist Niels Bohr, gunfights at high noon in Western movies do not only
captivate the cinema audience, but they also provide an accurate illustration of a psychophysical
law. He suggested that willed actions come with slower movement execution than reactions and
therefore, a film’s hero is able to get the upper hand even though the villain normally draws first. A
corresponding “Gunslinger effect” has been substantiated by empirical studies. Because these
studies used a markedly competitive setting, however, it is currently unclear whether the Gunslinger
effect indeed reflects structural differences between willed actions and reactive movements, or
whether it is a by-product of the competitive setting. To obtain bullet-proof evidence for a true
reactive advantage, we investigated willed and reactive movements during a cooperative interaction
of two participants. A pronounced reactive advantage emerged, indicating that indeed two
independent systems control willed and reactive movements.

The role of the cerebellum in motor-cognitive dual-tasking
Erika C. S. Künstler, Kathrin Finke, Albrecht Günther, Carsten Klingner & Peter Bublak
Hans Berger Department of Neurology, Jena University Hospital
Erika.Kuenstler@med.uni-jena.de

Dual-tasking is central to everyday life. Yet this concurrent performance of two tasks typically leads to
decreased accuracy in the performance of either one or both tasks. Whilst cerebellar involvement in
motor planning and action control has long been established, recent imaging data from healthy
subjects suggests that this brain area also plays a role in executive functions, and in motor-cognitive
dual-tasking in particular. This talk will look more closely at the implications of this, presenting
findings from a motor-cognitive dual-tasking study conducted on stroke patients with hemispherically
isolated cerebellar lesions, as compared to healthy age-matched controls. More specifically, a visual
attention whole report test based on the “theory of visual attention” (TVA) was combined with an
alternating finger tapping task. This motor-cognitive dual-task indicated that motor performance
deteriorates when a visual task is conducted concurrently, with declines in visual attention occurring
not only as a result of performing two tasks simultaneously, but also being further exacerbated by
cerebellar damage. Moreover, a reduction in visual processing speed (parameter C) was seen in
those patients who displayed an especially pronounced deficit in tapping. This was supported by
imaging data, which showed decreased functional connectivity associated with higher dual-task cost.

147

Contributions

Perception of penalty takers in soccer with varying graphical levels of
detail
Johannes Kurz1, Fabian Helm2, Nikolaus F. Troje3 & Jörn Munzert1

Justus-Liebig-University, Department of Sport Science; 2Goethe University, Department of Sport Science; 3Queen's
University, Department of Psychology
johannes.kurz@sport.uni-giessen.de
1

The aim of this study was to investigate whether the presentation of penalty takers in soccer with
different graphical levels of detail affect the prediction accuracy, the response time and the gaze
behavior of goalkeepers. 13 male soccer players (experience: 14.8 ± 4.4 years; age: 21.0 ± 2.7
years) were recorded while they had to predict shot direction (left/right) of penalty takers with
varying graphical levels of detail. Penalty takers were presented either as point-light-displays, stickfigure-displays or as realistic avatars (Loper, Mahmood, & Black, 2014) on a large screen (3.2 x
2.1 m) in life-size. The participants had to perform close to realistic movements to the appropriate
side. Gaze behavior was recorded with a head-mounted eye tracker (SMI, Teltow, Germany). Results
showed that the percentage of correct predictions was significantly higher for realistic avatars
(71.7%) and for stick-figure-displays (69.6%) compared to point-light-displays (63.3%). However,
stick-figure-displays and realistic avatars did not differ significantly. The response time did not reveal
significant differences between conditions. Gaze behavior in terms of the viewing time on the areas
of interest (head, upper body, hip, legs) differed between realistic avatars compared to point-lightdisplays and stick-figure-displays, but no significant difference was found between point-light-displays
and stick-figure-displays.

Near-hand effect revisited: Potential of Virtual Reality (VR) to study
psychological processes
Martin Lachmair, Christian Scharinger & Peter Gerjets
Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien Tübingen
m.lachmair@iwm-tuebingen.de

According to the near-hand effect cognitive control is enhanced for stimuli presented nearby subjects'
hands. For example, Weidler and Abrams (2013) observed the flanker interference effect to be
reduced in task conditions with subjects' hands positioned nearby the stimuli as compared to
positioning the hands further away. Building on these observations in the current study (N = 18) we
were interested whether the near-hand effect would also occur when flanker stimuli were presented
in VR with virtual controllers replacing subjects' hands. The controllers were either positioned on both
sides nearby the Flanker stimuli (near-hand condition) or were not visible (far-hand condition). In line
with Weidler and Abrams (2013) we did not observe any effect of posture on reaction times (RTs).
RTs however showed the classical flanker interference effect with longer RTs for incongruent as
compared to congruent flanker stimuli. For accuracy we also found the flanker interference effect
with lower accuracies for incongruent as compared to congruent flanker stimuli. In addition, we
observed a main effect of posture on accuracy with accuracies being higher in the near- as
compared to the far-hand condition. However, we did not observe an interaction between posture
and congruency as in the original study.

148

Contributions

Looming sounds benefit emergency braking due to their saliency
Marie Lahmer1, Lewis Chuang2 & Verena Carola Seibold3

Max-Planck-Institut Biologische Kybernetik; 2Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics; 3Eberhard Karls
University Tübingen, Department of Psychology
marielahmer@humanmachinesystems.org
1

Braking responses are faster when drivers hear looming sounds that increase in intensity, relative to
sounds with constant intensity (Gray, 2011). This finding agrees with research that has shown
preferential neural processing for looming stimuli (e.g., Tyll et al., 2013). It remains unknown if the
looming benefit reported by Gray (2011) was due to the perceived saliency of looming sounds, or
as a result of their ability to re-direct attention away from vehicle control to braking. The current study
was conducted in a driving simulation for a vehicle with automated lateral and longitudinal control.
Participants were only required to perform emergency braking if the lead vehicle suddenly braked.
We found fastest braking times when these instances were accompanied by a looming sound
(M=825 ms), relative to a constant sound (M=844 ms), or no sound (M=1098 ms; F(1.29,
23.3)=200, p<.05, ?2=0.9). There was no significant difference in false brakings induced by
looming and constant sounds (t(18)=.57, p=.58). Thus, we find that looming sounds facilitate
braking without increasing a bias for braking. This work demonstrates that looming sounds can
hasten braking directly, even in the absence of task-switching. We discuss the implications of this
work to auditory warning design.

When specific action biases meet nonspecific preparation: Event
repetition modulates the variable-foreperiod effect
Robert Langner1, Michael B. Steinborn2, Simon B. Eickhoff1 & Lynn Huestegge2

Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Institute of Systems Neuroscience; 2University of Würzburg, Psychological
Methods, Cognition, and Applied Research
robert.langner@uni-duesseldorf.de

1

Preparing for the moment of action speeds up performance even if the particular action is unknown
beforehand. When the preparatory interval, or foreperiod (FP), varies unpredictably between trials,
responses usually become faster with increasing FP length. This temporal preparation benefit partly
originates from asymmetric sequential effects of preceding FP length, which mostly affect
performance in short-FP (vs. long-FP) trials. In two experiments, we examined whether and how eventspecific biases arising from previous stimulus processing and responding affect both variable-FP and
sequential FP effects. To this end, we evaluated the impact of trial-to-trial repetitions versus shifts of
imperative events. Reaction-time benefits of event repetitions were greater in short-FP trials, just like
sequential FP effects but independent of them. This interaction pattern was more strongly pronounced
in a wide (vs. narrow) temporal context, arguing against a simple decay-based explanation of
absent event repetition benefits in long-FP trials. Instead, our data support a view of temporal
preparation as a dynamic combination of attaining time-point-related response-unspecific readiness
and facilitating the processing of specific stimulus–response events, biased by previous action.
Forming a complementary balance, the behavioral impact of the latter mechanism appears to
depend on the strength of the former.

149

Contributions

Learning a Visuomotor Rotation in a Dual Task Paradigm
Lisa-Marie Langsdorf1, Frederic Goehringer2, Raphael Schween1, Sven-Soeren Schwippert1, Mathias
Hegele1 & Thomas Schenk2
Justus-Liebig-University, Neuromotor Behavior Lab, Department of Psychology and Sport Science; 2LudwigMaximilians-University, Clinical Neuropsychology, Department of Psychology
Lisa.M.Langsdorf@sport.uni-giessen.de

1

Delaying visual feedback to subjects adapting to a visuomotor cursor rotation has been found to
enhance explicit and attenuate implicit learning. Dual task costs occur when a secondary task taps
the same resources as the primary task. We here ask if these two phenomena interact and want to
explore which aspect of motor learning is most affected by a secondary task. Participants practiced
a 30° visuomotor cursor rotation and received terminal visual feedback either when they had
reached the target or 500 ms later (delay-condition). Feedback delay and secondary task (none or
auditory 1-back) were tested in a 2x2 between-subject-design. Explicit, implicit and total learning
were dissociated in a series of single-task posttests. We found that participants receiving delayed
feedback showed significantly less implicit and somewhat (but not significantly) more explicit
learning. Dual task costs were present during practice but absent in all posttests. We argue that in a
motor learning paradigm a secondary task affects performance in the task but not the learning
process itself. It seems to indicate limited expression during dual-task practice. Alternatively,
participants could be learning explicitly from remembered observations during the single-task
posttests.

Three Weeks of SSRI Administration enhances the Visual Perceptual
Threshold - A Randomized Placebo-Controlled Study
Jon Lansner

University of Copenhagen, Center for Visual Cognition
Lansnerjon@gmail.com

The serotonergic system has been repeatedly linked to visual attention in general, but the effects of
SSRI on specific components of visual attention remain unknown. Changes in distinct perceptual and
cognitive processes are not readily evident in most attention paradigms, however in this study, we
isolate basic aspects of visual attention to investigate potential effects of longer-term SSRI
administration on visual attention in healthy males. In a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled
design, 32 young healthy males were tested on multiple attentional parameters, before and after 3
weeks of SSRI intervention with fluoxetine (40 mg daily) or placebo. Data were modelled with a
computational theory of visual attention to derive independent estimates of five distinct components
of visual attention. The SSRI-intervention selectively and significantly lowered the threshold for
conscious visual perception. We demonstrate that this improvement does not stem from a general
increase in the speed of visual processing, as previously suggested, but specifically from a change in
the perceptual threshold. The study provides a novel description of the attentional dynamics affected
by SSRI, while supporting previous findings on attentional effects of SSRI. Furthermore, it accentuates
the utility of employing accuracy-based measures of attentional performance when conducting
psychopharmacological research.

150

Contributions

Prediction in saccadic eye movement
Markus Lappe

University of Muenster, Institute for Psychology
mlappe@uni-muenster.de

Saccades are fast, brief, and frequent eye movements that quickly switch the retinal image from one
point of interest to another, produce transient image disturbances, and require open-loop control.
Predictive mechanisms are essential for all of these issues. Prediction in saccadic eye movement is
based on efference copy signals of the saccade motor commands. These signals are used by the
brain to predict the post-saccadic retinal location of objects seen in the pre-saccadic scene, to
enhance and speed-up processing in the target region, to adapt saccade motor control, and to
reduce the impact of visual disturbances experienced during saccades. In my presentation I will
compare several of these predictive mechanisms and discuss their dependence on processes
involved in saccade preparation. I will compare reactive saccades, i.e. saccades made quickly to a
suddenly appearing target, and voluntary saccades, i.e. saccades made at a slower pace to
continuously visible targets. The latter supports better preparation and, in some cases, better
prediction.

Time will tell: Binding and retrieval of temporal distractors
Ruth Laub, Birte Moeller & Christian Frings

University of Trier, Department of Cognitive Psychology
ruth.laub@uni-trier.de

If a target stimulus is presented together with a distractor, both stimuli can be encoded together with
the response in an event file (see Hommel, 2004). In turn, even the repetition of the distractor can
retrieve the encoded response (the distractor-response binding effect). Moreover, research regarding
stimulus-response (S-R-) binding effects (Bogon, Thomaschke, and Dreisbach, 2017) found that
temporal features of a stimulus can be bound into auditory representations. Here we focused on the
role a time interval can play in S-R-binding if it is presented as a distractor. In the present experiment
(N = 30), a prime-probe design was chosen to investigate, whether a temporal distractor stimulus
(e.g. time interval before stimulus onset), which was presented additional to a visual distractor
stimulus, can be integrated with a response and later on retrieve the integrated response. The results
show that the temporal distractor stimulus is integrated with the response and the visual distractor
stimulus, modulating response retrieval that is triggered by repetition of the visual distractor.

151

Contributions

You get what you (unconsciously) see: Der Einfluss von Farbpriming
auf Aufmerksamkeit, Verarbeitungszeit und Gedächtnisleistung
Sarah Leinberger & Thomas Bäumer

Hochschule für Technik Stuttgart, Wirtschaftspsychologie
72lesa1mwp@hft-stuttgart.de

Beim Farbpriming werden durch Farbreize bestimmte Assoziationen im Gedächtnis aktiviert, die
Einfluss auf folgendes Verhalten haben können. So kann beispielsweise (unbewusstes) Priming von
Farbreizen die Auswahl von entsprechend verpackten Schokoladen beeinflussen (Beck, Kolb &
Bäumer, 2017). In der vorliegenden Arbeit wurde untersucht, welche kognitiven Prozesse als
potentielle vermittelnde Variablen diesen Effekt erklären könnten. Dabei wurden die Prozesse
Aufmerksamkeit, Verarbeitungszeit und Gedächtnisleistung betrachtet. Als Hypothese wurde
erwartet, dass bei Vorgabe eines Farbreizes als Prime sich die Aufmerksamkeit, Verarbeitungszeit
und Gedächtnisleistung selektiv für Zielreize in derselben Farbe erhöhen sollte. In einer Studie
wurden 30 Versuchspersonen nacheinander mit keinem (Kontrollbedingung), einem roten und einem
blauen Farbreiz als Prime konfrontiert. Danach sollten die Probanden Regale mit bunten Objekten
betrachten und sich diese einprägen. Dabei wurde mittels Eye-Tracking die Aufmerksamkeit und
Verarbeitungszeit der Farbreize erfasst; die Erinnerungsleistung über eine direkte Abfrage. Die
Ergebnisse zeigen einen selektiven Einfluss auf die Aufmerksamkeit und die Verarbeitungszeit für die
jeweils als Prime verwendete Farbe. Es zeigt sich also, dass durch Farbpriming Aufmerksamkeit und
Informationsverarbeitung von folgenden Reizen beeinflusst werden. Allerdings scheint dieser Effekt
zeitlich sehr flüchtig zu sein. In weiteren Studien sollte untersucht werden, ob diese Variablen als
Mediatoren den Einfluss von Priming auf eine Auswahlentscheidung erklären können.

Neural correlates of incidental L2 auditory word learning
Kristin Lemhöfer, Julia Egger & James McQueen

Radboud University Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior
k.lemhofer@donders.ru.nl

We investigated the electrophysiological correlates of incidental word learning in a second
language (L2). Native Dutch speakers alternately made price comparisons of depicted objects in
their L2 English, or listened to and judged those by a virtual partner. Critically, some of the object
names (e.g., ‘whisk’) were previously unknown to them, as verified in a pretest. Later trials where
participants had to name the same critical objects showed whether they had learned the words. On
average, 36 % of the previously unknown words were learned after the first, and another 20 % after
the second exposure. Instead of an enlarged N400 usually observed for pseudowords vs. words,
there was a late-positive ERP for previously unknown compared to known words, suggesting that new
to-be learned words are encoded differently than pseudowords. Furthermore, there was a late
positivity for subsequently learned vs. forgotten words, similar to what has been observed by others
for explicit learning tasks and other materials than L2 words. Furthermore, learned new words
became less distinguishable from previously known words than did not yet learned new words in the
second exposure. This study is the first to reveal neural correlates of learning and memory for new L2
words.

152

Contributions

Diffusion modeling in motivational psychology: Inter-individual
differences in fear of failure predict cognitive processing
Veronika Lerche1, Andreas B. Neubauer2 & Andreas Voss1

Heidelberg University, Psychological Institute; 2Department for Education and Human Development, German Institute
for International Educational Research (DIPF)
veronika.lerche@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de
1

Individuals high in implicit fear of failure (FF) have been found to show reduced performance in
achievement settings. However, the underlying mechanisms of this diminished performance have not
yet been examined. In an experiment based on 280 participants, we investigated the effects of
implicit FF on the cognitive processes involved in a binary decision task. The binary task was
introduced to the participants as a measure of intelligence. FF was aroused by means of false
performance feedback: One group of participants received mainly negative performance feedback
(frustration group) in contrast to predominantly positive feedback in the control group. A diffusion
model analysis revealed that individuals higher in FF suffered more from the negative performance
feedback in terms of speed of information accumulation (i.e., drift rate of the diffusion model).
Participants higher in FF did not differ from their less fearful counterparts in speed-accuracy settings
or non-decisional components. By means of our study we exemplarily show that the diffusion model
can provide new insights in the field of motivational psychology. The presentation of this study will
be preceded by an introduction to diffusion modeling to provide the background knowledge for this
talk and also the subsequent talks of this symposium.

Too good to be true? Behavioral and pupillometric signatures of
surprise in risk—reward environments
Christina Leuker, Thorsten Pachur, Ralph Hertwig & Timothy J Pleskac

Max Planck Institute for Human Development
leuker@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

Risks and rewards are inversely related in many domains in the environment (Pleskac & Hertwig,
2014). Do people internalize and exploit the link between risks and rewards when probability
information is available (decisions under risk)? Using a novel preferential oddball paradigm, we
show that people build up expectations about risk-reward structures from the choice environments
they experience. Across two experiments (N = 183), participants priced monetary gambles drawn
from negative, positive or uncorrelated risk-reward environments. In later trials, participants were
presented with surprising gambles that did not match the environments’ risk-reward structure.
Participants took more time responding to surprising versus expected options. Crucially, surprisinglygood options were evaluated with even more scrutiny than surprisingly-bad options. When time was
limited, prices of surprising, high stakes options deviated from the expected values of the gambles
towards the expected probability. Moreover, surprisingly-good options were associated with an
increased pupil size. Taken together these signatures of surprise show how risky options are
evaluated by not only the probabilities and payoffs that make up the option, but by their overall fit
within a learned risk-reward environment. Overall, these signatures may reflect an adaptive response
to help identify when options are too good to be true.

153

Contributions

Cognitive performance under motor demands – On the influence of
task difficulty and postural control
Magnus Liebherr1, Hanna Weiland-Breckle2, Tanja Grewe3 & Petra B. Schumacher2

University of Duisburg-Essen, Department of General Psychology: Cognition; 2University of Cologne, Department of
German Language and Literature I; 3Hochschule Fresenius, University of Applied Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Social Sciences
magnus.liebherr@uni-due.de
1

We often walk around when we have to think about something, but suddenly stop when we are
confronted with a further demanding cognitive task. The present study aimed to investigate
neurophysiological effects of simultaneously performing motor and cognitive tasks as well as the
influence of task difficulty. Twenty healthy individuals (24.1 years) performed two cognitive tasks
with different levels of difficulty while sitting and standing on one leg. In addition to behavioral data,
we recorded the electroencephalogram from 26Ag/AgCI scalp electrodes. Behavioral findings
revealed no significant effects for the two factors. Statistical analysis of the early time window (200300ms) registered a motor x cognition interaction [F(1,19)=5.83, p<0.027]. Resolution of this
interaction revealed an effect of the cognitive task under one-legged stance condition [F(1,19)=4.32,
p<0.051], with a more pronounced positivity for the simple task. No significant differences emerged
for the simple motor condition [F<0.6]. Analyzing the time-window between 350 and 500ms, no
interaction was found between motor and cognitive tasks but main effects of the motor task
[F(1,19)=27.09, p<0.001] and a marginal effect of the cognitive task [F(1,19)=4.12, p<0.057].
The motor-cognitive interaction found in P2, leads to the suggestion that the more complex motor task
facilitates cognitive task performance.

Lack of sleep hampers cognitive control: reduced proactive control
after sleep restriction
Simon Liegl, Lucas Haraped, Pierre Sachse & Thomas Maran
University of Innsbruck, General and Experimental Psychology
simon.liegl@student.uibk.ac.at

According to the Yerkes-and-Dodson Law the influence of arousal on performance follows an ushaped function, meaning performance is the highest when a person is under the influence of an
optimal level of arousal. As we could recently proof, an increased arousal does, in fact, impair the
performance in tasks requiring a ‘cognitive’ strategy instead of reflexive responding (Maran et al.,
2017). This may be attributable to a greater reliance on a ‘habitual’ at the cost of a more
demanding ‘cognitive’ processing mode (Schwabe & Wolf, 2013). The current study aimed to
examine whether states at the opposite end of the u-shaped function, i.e. states low in arousal cause
similar effects. We conducted a full within-subject experiment testing the impact of acute sleep
deprivation on proactive control, measured by the performance in the DPX-Paradigm (Jones,
Sponheim, & MacDonald, 2010). We tested 10 healthy male adults (M = 20.5, SD = 1.78) four
consecutive times, each one week apart, with one measurement after a controlled period of 24 hours
of sleep deprivation. Sensitivity for A-cue trials was used as an indicator of the reliance on proactive
control. The results proved strong evidence for a specifically impaired proactive control after sleep
restriction.

154

Contributions

Optimizing multitasking through our body: Reduced between-task
interference when a single response hand is located close to the
prioritized stimulus
Roman Liepelt1 & Rico Fischer2

German Sport University Cologne, Performance Psychology; 2University of Greifswald, Psychology
r.liepelt@dshs-koeln.de

1

When response hands are located close to a stimulus (hands proximal) this stimulus receives more
attentional resources as when the hands are located further away (hands distal). We used a dualtask paradigm in combination with two hand proximity manipulations to test if hand proximity
improves task shielding – the separation of two tasks. In Experiment 1, both response hands were
either located at the monitor or on the knees. In Experiment 2, additional conditions were included,
in which a single hand (left or right response hand) was located in a proximal condition. In
Experiment 1, results showed that close stimulus-hand proximity reduced the amount of between-task
interference (increased Task 1 shielding). Extending these findings, in Experiment 2 a further
reduction of between-task interference was obtained when a single hand was located at the monitor
instead of two hands. These results provide further evidence for a hand-specific processing benefit
supporting more separate processing of two tasks. Results are inconsistent with the assumption of a
generally increased attentional processing benefit for multiple stimuli within hand space. These
findings demonstrate that stimulus-hand proximity affects the quality of multiple task performance,
which is discussed in the context of basic and applied cognitive research.

Neither singleton detection nor feature search – electrophysiological
evidence for an intermediate, dimension-based, search mode
Anna M. Liesefeld1, Heinrich René Liesefeld2 & Hermann J. Müller3

Department Psychologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München; 2Department Psychologie und Graduate School
of Systemic Neurosciences, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München; 3Department Psychologie, Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversität München; Birkbeck College
anna.liesefeld@psy.lmu.de

1

When searching through visual scenes for a target object, attention is not randomly shifted around,
but guided by task goals as well as object characteristics. Abundant evidence shows that people can
either attend to any conspicuity (saliency-detection mode) or, alternatively, restrict search to objects
with specific features (feature-search mode). Which search mode people are in can be probed by
presenting selected distractors and extracting the N2pc component from the EEG. Using this
approach, we recently observed exceptionally strong attentional capture (distractor N2pc) by an
orientation-defined distractor during search for an orientation-defined target, a finding explained by
the Dimension Weighting Account (DWA): Up-weighting the target-defining dimension (orientation)
inevitably also up-weighted the distractor. Thus, DWA implies an intermediate, dimension-based,
search mode. To substantiate this claim, we performed a series of EEG experiments showing that,
when searching for a 12° tilted target, attention is captured by distractors tilted 45° into the opposite
direction, while red distractors are ignored. This holds true even when the two types of distractors
occur unpredictably intermixed across trials. We conclude that searching for a specific feature
(holding a target template) is not always (or typically) possible and that people then resort to a
dimension-based search mode.

155

Contributions

How an executive control mechanism gates access to visual working
memory
Heinrich René Liesefeld1 & Hermann J. Müller2

Department Psychologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München; Graduate School of Systemic Neuroscience;
Department Psychologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München; Birkbeck College
Heinrich.Liesefeld@psy.lmu.de

1
2

As the capacity of visual working memory is severely restricted, executive control mechanisms that
guard VWM against the intrusion of irrelevant information are pivotal. Previously, we identified a
neuronal correlate of such a control mechanism that predicts the amount of unnecessarily stored
information as well as the capacity of VWM. This prefrontal bias signal manifests as a negative
increase in the electroencephalogram for distractor-present relative to distractor-absent trials over
(pre-)frontal electrode sites. We aimed to elucidate the nature of this apparently crucial control
mechanism and ask which information it works on. By trial-wise providing partial information about
the memory display prior to its onset, we examined whether the prefrontal bias signal is influenced
by advance information about the mere presence vs. absence of distractors (Exp. 1), or whether
more specific information about the location of targets and distractors is necessary (Exp. 2 and 3). It
turned out that mere information on distractor presence had no influence whatsoever, but that the
prefrontal bias signal was expedited by the availability of location information. This indicates that
the control mechanism reflected by this signal does not induce a general distractor-filtering mode, but
rather a bias in the spatial allocation of memory resources.

An Interference Model of Visual Working Memory: Applications to
Change Detection
Hsuan-Yu Lin & Klaus Oberauer

Department of Psychology, University of Zurich
h.lin@psychologie.uzh.ch

The studies of visual-working memory often employ change-detection task and continuous-stimulus
reproduction task. In continuous-stimulus reproduction task, participants occasionally report the nontarget items instead of the target. The presence of non-target response is particularly important for
Interference Model which relies on the interference of non-target items to explain the set-size effect
(Oberauer & Lin, 2017). In this study, we used single-probe change-detection task with stimulus from
continuous dimension. By presenting the probe from the non-target item, we can investigate the
amount interference from non-target item. Intrusion cost, the decrease of performance to reject the
probe from the non-target items comparing to the new probe, was found and stayed relatively
constant throughout the set sizes. We fitted the Interference Model along with Variable Precision and
Slot-Averaging models to the result of change-detection task with Bayesian Inference rule similar to
the one used in Keshvari, van den Berg, & Ma (2013). The Interference Model is successful in
predicting the set-size effect and the constant intrusion cost, while the Variable Precision and SlotAveraging models failed to predict the intrusion cost at all. Additional assumptions, e.g., a linear
increasing of swap error with set sizes, are required for Variable Precision and Slot-Averaging
models.

156

Contributions

Hierarchy as a moderator of lateral attitude change: Values and
policies
Roman Linne

Universität Bielefeld, Department of Psychology
roman.linne@uni-bielefeld.de

The lateral attitude change (LAC) model (Glaser et al., 2015) postulates that a hierarchical
relationship between attitude objects moderates attitude generalization and displacement effects.
This study investigated this moderator effect using the relation between the value equality and the
policy gender-related affirmative action. Participants read an essay arguing either against the value
or against the policy. Subsequently, participants rated both attitude objects which depending on
condition served as focal or lateral object. Additionally, participants were asked to rate further
lateral values and policies that varied in similarity to the focal objects. Results showed that an essay
arguing against equality not only changed the attitude toward the focal object (equality) but also the
attitudes toward lateral policies. Also, participants’ confidence in their attitudes toward lateral values
decreased. However, as expected, while having some effect on lateral policies, the essay arguing
against gender-related affirmative action did not change the participants’ attitudes toward lateral
values. Effects on lateral attitudes were partly moderated by the degree of similarity to the focal
object. These results support the hypothesis of stronger LAC effects when the focal object is at a
higher hierarchical level than the lateral objects.

The effect of perceived similarity and perceived usefulness on online
learning of statistics
Tuo Liu, Maria Mikheeva & Günter Daniel Rey

Chemnitz University of Technology, Psychology of learning with digital media
tuo.liu@s2015.tu-chemnitz.de

In multimedia learning, many instructional design guidelines have been developed to guide the
learning processes and motivate the learners. According to social cognitive theory and cognitive and
affective theory of multimedia learning, learning by observing pedagogical agents has a positive
influence on the learning. This study investigated whether perceived similarity with the agent and
perceived usefulness of the materials could influence the self-efficiency of learners, and finally
enhance the learning outcomes. An experiment was performed, in which participants have learned
fundamental concepts of multiple regression. The experimental process includes an introduction to
the pedagogical agent with the picture, learning materials with audio comments from the agent and
a knowledge test. A 2 × 2 between-subjects design was used with the factors “perceived similarity”
(high vs. low) and “perceived usefulness” (high vs. low). Overall, sixty-five female students were
randomly assigned to one of four groups. Results suggested that low perceived similarity led to
significantly higher learning outcomes. Additionally, in the low perceived similarity condition, learner
with high perceived usefulness had significantly higher self-efficiency than learner with low perceived
usefulness. Possibly, the students could not identify them with the agent because the performance of
the agent was not confident enough.

157

Contributions

Articulatory information helps encode lexical contrasts in a second
language
Miquel Llompart & Eva Reinisch

Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Institute of Phonetics and Speech Processing
evarei@phonetik.uni-muenchen.de

The present study examined whether obtaining additional articulatory information about the sounds
of a difficult second-language contrast (English /e/-/æ/ for German speakers) could help nonnative
listeners to encode a lexical distinction between novel words containing these two categories. Novel
words (e.g., tenzer-tandek) were trained with different types of input and their recognition was tested
in a visual-world eye-tracking task. In Experiment 1, a baseline group was exposed to the words
audio-only during training, whereas another group additionally saw videos of the speaker
articulating the target words. In Experiment 2, listeners were asked to repeat the target words
themselves as part of their training. It was found that both audiovisual input and word repetition
during training resulted in asymmetric fixation patterns at test: Words containing /e/ were
recognized more readily than those with /æ/, mirroring the recognition asymmetry reported for real
English words. This asymmetry was not present for the audio-only group, in which target words with
the two vowels were fixated similarly. The results suggest that articulatory knowledge, acquired
through both passive exposure to visual information (Experiment 1) and active production
(Experiment 2), can help distinguishing words with difficult foreign sounds.

The Impact of Emotions on Cognitive Processing during Text Learning
Kristina Loderer1, Christof Kuhbandner2 & Reinhard Pekrun3

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München (University of Munich, LMU), Department of Psychology; 2Universität
Regensburg, Institut für Experimentelle Psychologie, Lehrstuhl für Psychologie VI; 3Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität
München (University of Munich, LMU), Department of Psychology; Australian Catholic University Sydney
Kristina.Loderer@psy.lmu.de

1

Extracting, organizing, and integrating information from texts is a staple form of learning. Given that
prior research on emotions and cognitive processing in learning contexts has been primarily
correlational or employed artificial rather than ecologically valid emotion induction techniques, this
study examined effects of positive-activating, positive-deactivating, negative-activating, and negativedeactivating emotions on text learning induced via performance feedback,. In line with the control
value theory of achievement emotions (Pekrun & Perry, 2014) we expected positive-activating
emotions to enhance relational learning (i.e., integrating information) as assessed through a test
measuring participants’ recall of conceptually-related information (Chan et al., 2006). Negativedeactivating emotions, on the other hand, were expected to foster more item-specific processing, and
deactivating emotions, particularly of negative valence, to impede learning altogether. Results of our
2x2 between-subjects experiment (N = 96 undergraduates) revealed that, contrary to our initial
hypotheses, but in line with resource allocation models positing that positive-deactivating states take
up less cognitive resources required for complex learning (Meinhardt & Pekrun, 2003),
comparatively lower levels of activation were conducive to relational-integrative learning, whereas
higher activation led to more item-specific processing. Descriptively, the former was most
pronounced in the positive-deactivating condition. Implications for practice and future research are
discussed.

158

Contributions

Grounded Foresight: Anticipatory Remapping of Peripersonal Space
During Object Interactions
Johannes Lohmann, Anna Belardinelli & Martin V. Butz
University of Tübingen, Cognitive Modeling
johannes.lohmann@uni-tuebingen.de

Theories of anticipatory, event-predictive control suggest that action preparation and initiation
mechanisms activate desired, future goal states. Accordingly, sensorimotor processing should focus
on upcoming control events and critical event boundaries, such as reaching and establishing a grasp
for an object manipulation. Seeing the crucial role of relative spatial bodily encodings, and
particularly peripersonal hand space in object interactions, we investigated whether these encodings
are remapped into the future during action preparation and how this anticipatory remapping
depends on the object orientation, and the reliability of sensorimotor contingencies. We conducted
two experiments in an immersive virtual reality environment, combining the crossmodal congruency
paradigm, which has been used to study selective interactions between vision and touch within
peripersonal space, with an object manipulation task. We found significant crossmodal congruency
effects between touch on the fingers and visual distractors close to the approximate future finger
positions. In a second experiment, we additionally manipulated the visuo-motor mapping of the
participants’ virtual hand in order to manipulate the predictability of the movement outcome. The
results confirm that the establishment of anticipatory remapping depends on movement outcome
predictability. The results support theories of anticipatory, event-predictive control and show how
prediction uncertainty constrains anticipatory processes.

Improving navigation systems. How design features of guidance
systems influence survey and route knowledge
Lucas Lörch & Stefan Münzer

Universität Mannheim, Lehrstuhl Bildungspsychologie
lloerch@mail.uni-mannheim.de

Route guidance systems provide spatial information that supplement real-world experiences during
wayfinding. The design features of the images displayed by these guidance systems influence the
survey and route knowledge they convey. We conducted two experiments to test the influence of
different design features on spatial knowledge. The first experiment took place in a virtual reality.
During a learning phase, participants automatically moved through a virtual village. At each
intersection, a navigation system appeared. In a subsequent testing phase, participants had to use
their spatial knowledge of the village to complete a pointing task, a wayfinding task and a map
completion task. The second experiment took place in a real, but unknown city. Participants walked
a pre-defined route through the city and were instructed to look at a navigation system at each
intersection. Afterwards, they had to complete a pointing task and a sketch-map task. In both
experiments, the rotation of the map image, the zoom-level, the degree of schematization and the
display of off-screen landmarks was manipulated. When data collection is finished, data of about
300 participants will be analyzed with mixed-model regressions. The results could provide new
insights that are highly valuable for the research on spatial cognition.

159

Contributions

Does Peer Observation Specifically Increase Mid-Adolescents Risky
Decisions?
Corinna Lorenz & Jutta Kray

Universität des Saarlandes, Psychologie
corinna.lorenz@uni-saarland.de

Various studies on decision-making showed that mid-adolescents take more risky decisions when
being observed by a peer, mostly investigated with a specific task (a driving scenario). Our aim was
to investigate whether the peer effect can be generalized to another decision-making task. We used
the Balloon Analog Risk Task (BART) in which participants can gain money by inflating balloons.
Each pump increases the amount of gains but also increases the probability of a balloon to explode
at an unknown explosion point and in turn to lose all the already collected money. Risk taking was
measured by the number of pumps and the peer effect was assessed by comparing risk-taking in an
alone condition and under the observation of a fictional online peer. Data of 154 participants (age
range = 9-18 years) showed a peer effect, that is, higher number of pumps (i.e., increased risktaking) under peer observation than in the alone condition. However, in contrast to previous
findings, we did not find age differences in the peer effect. Hence, adolescents are not specifically
prone to risky decision-making when observed by a peer, suggesting that the peer effect may be
restricted to a specific type of task setting (driving scenario).

Does spectrum affect the implicit learning of an artificial musical
grammar?
Joshua Lorenzen

Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Institut für Psychologie
lorenzen@psychologie.uni-kiel.de

In a past study we investigated the impact of a pitch scale’s underlying tuning system on the implicit
learning of an artificial harmonic grammar to investigate the role of small-integer frequency ratios.
The results indicate the existence of a mental “general-purpose” syntax processor that can handle
both musical and amusical material. In the current study, we used complex sounds instead of sine
tones in order to study effects of a sound’s overtone structure on the relation between tuning and
learning outcome. Two different equal temperaments were compared: the Bohlen-Pierce scale and a
new scale which does hardly allow small-integer frequency ratios. Subjects in either group listened
over 30 minutes to 20 blocks of 18 different two-part sequences whose tone spectra were either
matched to the respective scale (resulting in consonant intervals) or not (resulting in “diffuse” sounds).
In a subsequent test phase, trained sequences were randomly presented with new grammatical
sequences and ungrammatical sequences, and the participants were asked whether the sequences
were old-grammatical, new-grammatical or new-ungrammatical. The results confirm the results of the
previous study. There were no distinct effects of the matching of the spectrum to the respective scale.

160

Contributions

Gaze and prior knowledge modulate allocentric coding in memoryguided reaching movement
Zijian Lu, Mathias Klinghammer & Katja Fiehler

Experimental Psychology, Justus-Liebig University Giessen
Fabio.Lu@psychol.uni-giessen.de

In this study we investigated the influence of gaze behavior and prior knowledge on the use of
allocentric information for memory-guided reaching. Participants viewed a breakfast scene with six
objects on the table (potential reach targets) and five objects in the background. Participants first
encoded the scene and after a short delay a test scene was presented with one table object missing
and one, three or five table objects horizontally shifted in the same direction. Participants performed
a memory-guided reaching movement toward the position of the missing object on a blank screen. In
order to examine the influence of gaze behavior, participants either freely moved their gaze (freeview) or kept gaze at a fixation point (fixation). The effect of prior knowledge was investigated by
informing participants about the reach target either before (preview) or after (non-preview) scene
encoding. Our results demonstrate that humans use allocentric information for reaching even if a
stable retinal reference is available. However, allocentric coding of reach targets is stronger when
gaze is free and prior knowledge about the reach target is missing. In sum, our findings suggest that
both prior knowledge and gaze behavior can modulate the weighting of allocentric information.

An analysis of response times in probability judgments based on the
Dual-Process Diffusion Model
Jonas Ludwig, Fabian Klaus Ahrens & Anja Achtziger

Zeppelin Universität Friedrichshafen, Department of Political and Social Sciences
jonas.ludwig@zu.de

Based on the Dual-Process Diffusion Model, the present research investigates three hypotheses about
response times of errors and correct responses in a binary-choice judgment and decision making
task. The model predicts that correct responses are slower than errors in case of conflicting decision
processes but faster than errors in case of alignment. Further, the model predicts that correct
responses in case of conflict are slower than correct responses in case of alignment. To test these
predictions, we conducted a binary-choice experiment in which decision problems (i.e., probability
judgments) elicited either conflict or alignment of a utility decision process and a heuristic decision
process. In accordance with the traditional dual-process architecture, the utility process captures
computational normative decision strategies, and the heuristic process describes rather intuitiveaffective aspects of decision making. The results support the hypotheses. This evidence strengthens
the predictive validity of the Dual-Process Diffusion Model and suggests that decision processes in
binary-choice tasks can be appropriately modeled as diffusion processes of evidence accumulation.

161

Contributions

The usefulness of task-irrelevant actions-effects in implicit sequencelearning
Clarissa Lustig & Hilde Haider

University of Cologne, Department of Psychology
clarissa.lustig@uni-koeln.de

In previous experiments, we found that a sequence of task-irrelevant effect-tones can be learned
implicitly when it is not consistently bound to the responses. However, replicating these findings with
visual effects led to mixed results (Lustig & Haider, in preparation). One possible explanation is that
visual effects interfere with the visual targets as both are presented in the visual modality (e.g. Mayr,
1996 (parallel learning); Posner, 1980 (location-dependent attention)). However, it is unclear
whether the visual-effect sequence is learned (Kunde et al., 2004) but due to interference inhibited
during training (Cock et al., 2002) or whether it is not learned at all. To investigate this question,
participants performed a serial reaction time task (Nissen & Bullemer, 1987) without any sequence
except a visual effect sequence. Either letters within or shapes around possible target-locations
served as visual effects. First results indicate that participants in both groups had learned the effectsequence. However, while the letter-group showed overall shorter reaction-times, only the shapegroup showed a significant increase of latencies when replacing the effect sequence. Thus, inhibition
of interfering effects decreased their influence on performance but enhanced processing of taskrelevant information.

Unterschiedliche Verfahrung zur Messung von Workload am
Arbeitsplatz: Ein Methodenvergleich
Sebastian Mach, Jan Philipp Gründling, Franziska Schmalfuß & Josef F. Krems

Chemnitz University of Technology, Professorship of Cognitive and Engineering Psychology
sebastian.mach@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de

Trotz zunehmender Digitalisierung und Vernetzung im Rahmen von Industrie 4.0 wird auch zukünftig
der Industriearbeiter eine wichtige Rolle spielen. Im Forschungsprojekt „Factory2Fit“ (gefördert durch
die EU im Rahmen von Horizon2020, Vertragsnummer 723277) werden Automatisierungslösungen
für die Fabrik der Zukunft entwickelt, bei denen der Arbeiter im Zentrum steht. Dabei sollen über eine
Schnittstelle von Mensch und Automation die Bedürfnisse und Präferenzen der Mitarbeiter in Echtzeit
berücksichtigt werden. Ein Zugang stellt die Erfassung psychischer Zustände mittels Fragebögen dar.
Als Schnittstelle soll eine Smartwatch verwendet werden. In einem ersten Experiment untersuchten wir
die Übereinstimmung verschiedener Darstellungsformen des NASA-TLX, präsentiert als
Papierfragebogen und als Anzeige auf der Smartwatch. Neunundzwanzig Probanden mussten
kontinuierliche Kopfrechenaufgaben mit drei unterschiedlichen Schwierigkeitsstufen bearbeiten.
Nach jeder Aufgabe wurde der NASA-TLX ausgefüllt, wobei variiert wurde zwischen der Eingabe
über die Lünette der Smartwatch, über Touch-Eingabe und dem Ausfüllen in Papierform. Die
Ergebnisse zeigten einen signifikant niedrigeren Mentalen Workload Score bei der Papierversion im
Vergleich zur Lünetten- bzw. Touch-Eingabe. Jedoch konnten die relativen Unterschiede zwischen
den verschiedenen Aufgabenschwierigkeitsgraden in jeder Bedingung adäquat abgebildet werden.
Die Befragung via Smartwatch eignet sich somit, um zwischen unterschiedlichem Mentalen
Workload differenzieren zu können und besitzt damit großes Potenzial für den Online-Einsatz im
Industrieumfeld.

162

Contributions

Human Visual Grasp Selection
Guido Maiello, Lina K Klein, Vivian C Paulun & Roland W Fleming
Justus-Liebig University Gießen, Department of Experimental Psychology
Guido.Maiello@psychol.uni-giessen.de

The apparent ease with which we grasp objects every day masks the complexity of computations
underlying visual grasp selection. Despite extensive literature describing human grasping patterns
and movement kinematics, little is understood about the computational basis of human grasping. In a
set of behavioral experiments, we asked participants to execute precision grasps to 3D objects of
varying shape, weight and surface properties. By measuring distances between different grasps on
the same object, we found that grasp patterns were highly consistent across participants (81.5%
[77.5-84.9; 95% CI] consistency). Grasping patterns were modulated by object shape, overall mass
as well as mass distribution, length of reach trajectory, and the orientation of the object relative to
the participant. Starting from these insights we constructed a model of human grasp selection.
Through a series of computational steps our model searches for grasps that maximize grasp stability
and comfort. Our model reaches a remarkable level of agreement with human participants of 82.2%
[76.6-87.1; 95% CI]: the model’s grasping patterns are effectively as similar to human grasping
patterns as human grasps from different subjects are to one another. Our work thus describes a dataand theory-driven approach to understand the computations underlying human grasping.

Pupil dilation predicts adaptive behavioral adjustments following
different error types
Martin E. Maier, Benjamin Ernst & Marco Steinhauser
Katholische Universität Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
martin.maier@ku.de

Pupil dilation as a measure of autonomic arousal has been shown to predict adaptive adjustments of
performance following behavioral errors. Here, we investigated whether this process is also sensitive
to different types of errors. In previous studies, we used a four-choice flanker task in which errors
occur either by pressing a button associated with the distractors (flanker errors), or by pressing a
button not associated with the stimulus at all (nonflanker errors). The error-related negativity, an
electrophysiological marker of early error monitoring in the medial frontal cortex, was increased for
flanker errors implying that the medial frontal cortex evaluates the type of error at an early time
point. In the present study, we show that, just like the error-related negativity, pupil dilation following
errors is increased for flanker errors and that this effect predicts post-error slowing of response times
and increase of response accuracy following errors on a single-trial level. This suggests that the
evaluation of error type contributes to adaptive adjustments of response strategy following errors by
modulating autonomic arousal.

163

Contributions

Mere selection increases the value of known products
Nadiia Makarina1, Ronald Hübner2 & Sebastian Dummel3

University of Konstanz, Cognitive Psychology and GSDS; 2University of Konstanz, Cognitive Psychology;
Universität zu Köln, Differentielle Psychologie und Psychologische Diagnostik
nadiia.makarina@uni-konstanz.de

1
3

It is usually assumed that consumers base their choice between products on the expected benefit
provided by the products. However, there is evidence that the mere selection of a product also
increases preference for this product. In a study by Janiszewski, Kuo, and Tavassoli (2013; Journal
of Consumer Research), participants had to select targets in a visual search task. As a result, in a
subsequent preference choice task former targets were preferred to former non-targets. For detecting
the relatively small increase in preference, they had to construct pairs of products that originally were
equal in value. This was achieved by using products that were unknown to the participants.
However, this method questions the generality of the mere selection effect. In the present study, we
therefore used known products as stimuli. The construction of equal-value pairs for the preference
choice task was based on preference ratings obtained in an independent preliminary study. In two
experiments with this method, we not only replicate and generalize the mere selection effect, but also
show that a selected product can increase in value.

Is there a SMARC effect for tones “without” different pitch height?
Stephanie Malek & Torsten Schubert

Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Psychology Department
stephanie.malek@psych.uni-halle.de

Pitches of musical tones can be ordered from low to high and they are mentally represented along a
spatial vertical axis. The effect of spatial–musical association of response codes (SMARC effect)
denotes the observation that participants respond faster on pure tones with high frequencies when
pressing an upper response key compared to a lower response key and vice versa for situations with
low frequency tones. However, for the case of Shepard tones (Shepard, 1964) tone pitch cannot be
adequately represented on a linear scale, but rather on a circular representation, with no start and
end of the scale. This predicts that there should be no SMARC effect, when participants respond on
Shepard tones with vertically ordered response keys. We tested this assumption with a same-different
paradigm, in which participants decided whether the pitches of a constant reference and variable
comparison tone were similar or different in pitch by pressing an upper or lower response key. Tones
were presented in two tonal conditions: as pure tones and Shepard tones. We found a SMARC
effect for pure- and Shepard tones. Differences in the response patterns of pure and Shepard tones
will be discussed.

164

Contributions

Impaired implicit acquisition of spatial context information during
increased arousal
Thomas Maran, Simon Liegl, Lucas Haraped & Pierre Sachse

General and Experimental Psychology, Department of Psychology, University of Innsbruck
thomas.maran@uibk.ac.at

Increased arousal promotes a shift from a hippocampus-based ‘cognitive’ strategy towards a
striatum-based ‘habit’ strategy underlying cognition, promoting a supersession of flexible thinking by
inflexible habits. Spatial processing, as one core function of the hippocampus-centered ‘cognitive’
system, should also be affected by this cognitive adaptation, specifically when spatial information is
encoded implicitly. Our study aims to test, whether implicit acquisition of spatial context information
is impaired within states high in arousal. We tested 84 participants (56 female) using the spatial
discrimination paradigm in a 3×5 factorial design with three arousal states (moderate arousal, high
appetitive arousal, high aversive arousal) as a between-subject variable and five lure displacements
as a within-subject variable. Results indicate an impairment of spatial context acquisition for arousal
groups, regardless of their motivational direction. These findings are in line with recent studies
showing a stress-driven impairment of spatial cognition and extend existing findings showing
disrupted implicit acquisition of spatial context during high arousal states. We suggest, that these
effects reflect a cognitive shift towards resource-saving and present-oriented reflexive processing
within challenging situations, enabling fast responses, but impairing the construction of a situational
model based on contextual details.

Ping-pong: attentional mechanisms during visual and linguistic
encoding
Ines Marberg & Johannes Gerwien

University of Heidelberg, Institute for German as a Foreign Language Philology
ines.marberg@gmx.de

What happens at the interface of visual scene perception and language planning? How are
attentional resources distributed between the two processes? Both are known to start rapidly after the
onset of a stimulus and overlap in time, posing a challenge to researchers on vision and language. If
we manage to investigate crosslinguistic typological influences on early information processing after
the onset of a visual scene, this could reveal more about how conceptualization for language
production and visual attention interrelate. I will present a new experimental approach that exploits
masked content-changes in the middle of short (560 ms) naturalistic video scenes during an event
description task (German/French). These changes possibly pass unnoticed due to the phenomenon
of change blindness. At the same time, the change provides an indicator for the time of information
processing (uptake, consolidation, update/monitoring). Analyses of the linguistic data reveal how
subjects accommodate to seemingly unnoticed changes and, thus, an effect of language on the
encoding of the manipulated objects may be detected. Building on the experimental results and
existing literature I will propose that attentional resources are allocated in an oscillatory fashion and
guided by conceptual frames structured by language.

165

Contributions

Post-learning attentional resource consumption weakens memory
retention
Markus Martini, Robert Marhenke & Pierre Sachse
University of Innsbruck
markus.martini@uibk.ac.at

Memories are vulnerable to distraction after its acquisition. The majority of studies indicate that a
brief period of wakeful rest after learning supports memory retention, whereas a resource
demanding distractor task weakens it. However, a beneficial effect of resting was not always found.
We tested the resting effect with a distractor task that put continuously high demands on selective
attentional processes, while memory load was held at a minimum. Participants were involved in two
consecutive word list learning and immediate recall phases. After one learning and recall phase,
participants rested for 8 min, after the other, they worked on the distractor task. A delayed surprise
free recall test took place at the end of the experimental session. Our results showed that more words
were retained in the rest condition compared to the attentional demanding distractor condition. We
discuss our findings in the light of recent findings with a focus on post-learning distractor task-specific
processes and their impact on memory consolidation.

A common, grounded basis for different types of stimulus-response
learning
Torsten Martiny-Huenger

UiT The arctic university of Norway, Department of Psychology
torsten.martiny-huenger@uit.no

Whereas stimulus-response (S-R) associations are traditionally established in the presence of relevant
perceptions and actions, there is growing evidence that similar associations can be formed in the
absence of actual action (e.g., by if-then action planning, instructions, observation). I will argue that
both types of S-R learning have a common basis. The argument is based on theories of embodied
cognition, in which it is proposed that higher cognitive functions (e.g., comprehension of verbal
content) are based on simulations in sensorimotor brain areas. These brain areas are also assumed
to play a dominant role in S-R learning based on actual perception and action. Thus, it can be
argued that Hebbian associative mechanisms in sensorimotor brain areas are the basis for both
types of S-R learning. The only difference concerns how these specific activity patterns in
sensorimotor areas are activated. Traditionally, they are understood to be activated by actual
stimulus perception and response execution. In the absence of actual actions, they are activated by
secondary stimuli – specific verbal content that is itself strongly linked to the respective activity
patterns in sensorimotor areas. Thus, an embodied cognition perspective can provide a common and
parsimonious explanation for different types of S-R learning.

166

Contributions

Low complexity of syllables drives preference effects for words
Ira Maschmann

University of Cologne, Department Psychology, Social Cognition Center Cologne
ira.maschmann@uni-koeln.de

Processing of language depends on various features of individual words, such as their frequency,
length, and complexity. These characteristics influence among other features the ease with which a
word is being processed. This so-called processing fluency has been shown to impact attitudes
towards (nonsense) words. Complexity of words can be manipulated through the mere composition
of words out of syllables: the most basic and high-frequent syllable in all languages constitutes an
open syllable with the structure consonant-vowel (CV), whereas less frequent syllables contain
consonant clusters (e.g., in the form of CCCV). Words that merely consist of open syllables should
be preferred over words that contain complex consonant clusters, since the first are fundamental and
most frequent within language and therefore easiest to process. In one experiment the impact of
high-frequent, open syllables on word liking was tested (N = 309). Number of syllables and letters
were manipulated orthogonally for words that started with a consonant and ended with a vowel,
respectively. Results support the hypothesis that words consisting of open syllables are liked over
words consisting of any other combination of syllables. The impact of frequency and fluency on this
preference effect are being discussed.

Does pupil size influence subjective brightness perception?
Sebastiaan Mathôt1 & Intan Wardhani2

University of Groningen, Department of Experimental Psychology; 2University of Groningen, Department of
Experimental Psychology; The Netherlands University of Oslo, Department of Psychology
s.mathot@cogsci.nl

1

The human pupil can change light influx by a factor of sixteen. Yet we do not perceive the world to
become darker or brighter whenever our pupils get bigger or smaller. In daily life, brightness
constancy is supported by many indirect cues, such as the knowledge that the brightness of most
objects is constant. Here we asked whether, in the absence of such indirect cues, pupil size does
influence subjective brightness. We performed two experiments in which participants judged the
relative brightness of a tester stimulus compared to a referent stimulus. We manipulated pupil size
during the presentation of the tester in different ways: by varying the difficulty of a secondary task
(mental effort induces large pupils; Exp. 1); or by presenting a red or blue stimulus (red light induces
larger pupils than equiluminant blue light; Exp. 2). We found that large pupils were associated with
an underestimation of the tester’s brightness; that is, larger pupils may cause things to appear
darker, possibly because of the strong association between large pupils and darkness. However,
more studies, using different methods, are needed to confirm the link between subjective brightness
and pupil size.

167

Contributions

Fatigue and Resting Related Changes in a Dual-two-Back Task
András Matuz1, Orsolya Simon1, István Hernádi2, Zsolt Kisander1, Kázmér Karádi1 & Árpád Csathó1
University of Pécs, Institute of Behavioural Sciences; 2University of Pécs, Department of Experimental Neurobiology
andras.matuz@aok.pte.hu

1

Mental fatigue induced by increasing Time-on-Task (ToT) has been found to affect many cognitive
operations. However, only a very few studies examined the effects of fatigue on tasks with non-visual
or bimodal sensory stimuli. Therefore, in one experiment, we tested how ToT affects dual-task
performance with visual and auditory stimuli. We adapted a bimodal 2-back task for ToT paradigm
[Gatekeeper task; Heatcote et al, 2015, Memory and Cognition, 43]. Participants were presented
with pairs of visual and auditory stimuli, and target-response was required if a stimulus in either
modality was identical to that shown two trials earlier. The experiment had two main phases. First,
participants (N = 20) performed the Gatekeeper task for 1.5 hours without rest (1500 trials in total).
Subjective fatigue, reaction time, error rates, and electrocardiogram were recorded. Second,
participants had a resting period (12 minutes) followed by an additional block of trials. The analyses
yielded increased subjective fatigue and compromised performance with increasing ToT. After
resting, performance was significantly improved. In addition, the heart rate decreased while the
heart rate variability increased over the duration of the experiment. Results will be discussed in terms
of the motivational and capacity accounts of mental fatigue.

The influence of different sensory signals on error perception and its
neural correlates
Lisa K. Maurer, Michael Joch, Mathias Hegele, Heiko Maurer & Hermann Müller
Justus-Liebig-University, Department of Sport Science
michael.joch@sport.uni-giessen.de

In a series of three EEG studies, we investigated the influence of sensory signals, coming from
different modalities, on the amplitude of ERPs related to error-prediction (ERN) and result-feedback
reaction (FRN). As a motor task, a semi-virtual throwing task was used. With respect to errorprediction, we found that action effect monitoring is not a prerequisite for outcome prediction.
Furthermore, the restriction of proprioceptive signals in an observation condition reduced the ERN
amplitude but it was still observable. However, removing visual signals about movement execution
and planning led to a drastic decrease in the prediction´s reliability and the amplitude of the ERN.
Referring to the reaction to result feedback, our results support the assumption of a complementary
behavior of the ERN and FRN. In detail, we find smaller FRN amplitudes when the ERN previously
arose (motor system is aware of an upcoming error) and vice versa. Summing up, our results let us
assume that the ERN scales with the reliability of the internal model´s outcome prediction. Sensory
input signals are differently weighted by the prediction model and a removal of these signals results
in a reduced to not existent ERN amplitude and, in consequence, to a larger FRN amplitude.

168

Contributions

Commonalities and differences of auditory and visual negative
priming
Susanne Mayr1 & Axel Buchner2

University of Passau, Chair of Psychology and Human-Machine Interaction; 2Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf,
Cognitive and Industrial Psychology
susanne.mayr@uni-passau.de

1

The negative priming effect—that is, the slowed-down and/or more error-prone responding to a
previously ignored stimulus—has traditionally been investigated in the visual domain. A far smaller
number of studies have focused on auditory negative priming. Whereas the overall picture suggests
that the same principles underlie the effect in both modalities, there are also several instances of
clear differences between auditory and visual negative priming. Based on two decades of research
on auditory negative priming we briefly touch upon commonalities with the visual domain and then
focus on areas in which the auditory domain is distinctly different from the visual domain. We will
cover mainly, but not exclusively, issues of spatial (as opposed to identity) negative priming, episodic
retrieval of response information, and strategic modulation. Whereas findings with respect to these
issues seem to reflect consistent and general differences between auditory and visual processing,
there are also some unique findings in auditory negative priming for which a conclusive explanation
has yet to be found.

Executive Control and the Implicit Association Test (IAT): Unraveling
the Effect of Switching Ability on IAT Scores
Franziska Meissner

Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Institut für Psychologie, Allgemeine Psychologie II
franziska.meissner@uni-jena.de

Although the Implicit Association Test (IAT) was introduced as a measure of evaluative associations,
IAT scores also vary with different levels of executive control, such as task-switching ability: The
higher the switching ability, the smaller the IAT score. The underlying processes, however, are still
largely unknown. In two studies, I tested the assumption that recoding, a simplification of the
classification task, is responsible for the effect. If recoding occurs, participants no longer switch
between tasks in compatible blocks. Hence, higher switching abilities should be accompanied by
smaller IAT scores to the extent that participants engage in recoding. In Study 1, I manipulated
recoding by comparing a standard IAT and a recoding-free IAT. As hypothesized, switching ability
correlated with IAT scores in the former but not in the latter condition. In Study 2, the moderating
influence of recoding was replicated within a single IAT by applying the ReAL model (Meissner &
Rothermund, 2013). This multinomial model prevents false conclusions by quantifying associations,
recoding and other processes underlying the IAT score in separate parameters. In the current study,
model analyses also provided insights into processes mediating the effect of switching ability on the
IAT score. Implications for IAT applications are discussed.

169

Contributions

Kindermörder! Eine experimentelle Untersuchung zur Verfälschbarkeit
von Selbstauskünften in indirekten Befragungen
Julia Meisters, Adrian Hoffmann & Jochen Musch

University of Duesseldorf, Department of Experimental Psychology
julia.meisters@uni-duesseldorf.de

Auf dem „Crosswise Model“ (CWM; Yu, Tian & Tang, 2008) beruht eine indirekte Fragetechnik,
welche die Vertraulichkeit von Antworten auf sensible Fragen garantiert. Die Verwendung dieser
experimentellen Technik führt zu valideren Schätzungen für die Prävalenz sensibler Merkmale als
direkte Fragen; sie zeichnet sich außerdem durch eine im Vergleich zu anderen indirekten Verfahren
leichte Verständlichkeit aus (Hoffmann & Musch, 2016; Hoffmann, Diedenhofen, Verschuere &
Musch, 2015). Wir haben zunächst untersucht, ob sich mit Hilfe der Technik Einflüsse sozialer
Erwünschtheit auf Selbstauskünfte zum Vorbildverhalten im Straßenverkehr kontrollieren lassen.
Erwartungsgemäß führte das CWM zu höheren und damit potentiell valideren Prävalenzschätzungen
für das von Kindern beobachtete Überqueren einer roten Ampel als eine direkte Frage. Darüber
hinaus erwiesen sich Prävalenzschätzungen mit dem CWM im Vergleich zu direkten Fragen als
weniger anfällig für eine bewusste Verfälschung. Bei einer direkten Befragung führte eine „fake
good“-Manipulation zu einer deutlich geringeren Prävalenzschätzung für das sensible Merkmal; in
der CWM-Bedingung veränderte eine „fake good“-Instruktion die Prävalenzschätzung nicht. Dieses
Ergebnismuster belegt die Robustheit des CWM sogar gegenüber einer bewussten
Verfälschungsabsicht. Diese Robustheit wird auf die Antwortsymmetrie des Verfahrens zurückgeführt,
aufgrund derer es keine „sicheren“ Antwortoptionen gibt, mit deren Hilfe die Teilnehmer eine
Trägerschaft des sensiblen Merkmals zuverlässig ausschließen können.

Elegance – a concept completely disregarded in empirical aesthetics
Winfried Menninghaus1, Valentin Wagner1, Vanessa Kegel1, Christine A. Knoop1 & Wolff Schlotz2
Max-Planck-Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Department of Language and Literature; 2Max-Planck-Institute for
Empirical Aesthetics, Labs and Methods
valentin.wagner@ae.mpg.de

1

In a series of studies we analyzed the perceptual correlates of elegance as well as its social,
cognitive, affective, and aesthetically evaluative implications. Using a variety of methods (free
association, semantic differentials, corpus-linguistic analysis, and statistical methods of image
analysis), we introduce “elegance” as a key concept of aesthetics. To date, it is completely
disregarded in empirical aesthetics. It has, however, great potential to add higher granularity to the
conceptual fundament of the field, for instance, by sharpening the very broad concept of beauty
through comparing it with elegance.

170

Contributions

ABrox - a graphical user interface for approximate Bayesian
computation
Ulf Mertens, Andreas Voss & Stefan Radev

Heidelberg University, Quantitative Research Methods
ulf.mertens@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

As mathematical models to describe psychological phenomena become more and more complex,
traditional methods for statistical inference might come short. Approximate Bayesian Computation
(ABC) is a computational method founded in Bayesian Statistics that encounters one potential
problem. Specifically, it enables parameter estimation and model comparison when the likelihood
function, expressing the probability of observed data under the model of consideration, is unknown
or computationally intractable. The idea of ABC is to bypass the computation of the likelihood
function by comparing model predictions with observed data, thus taking a simulation-based
approach. We introduce ABrox, a python module for ABC methods accompanied by a graphical
user interface (GUI). The GUI makes both model comparison and parameter inference easy to
handle. Users can choose among several algorithms for both tasks. With ABrox, researchers with a
basic knowledge of Python can implement their models easily using the GUI. Alternatively, it is also
possible to use ABrox directly within Python (i.e., without the GUI), which may be preferable for
advanced programmers.

Implied tactile motion: Localizing dynamic stimulations on the skin
Simon Merz1, Hauke S. Meyerhoff2, Charles Spence3 & Christian Frings1
University of Trier; 2Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien; 3University of Oxford
merzs@uni-trier.de

1

We report two experiments designed to investigate how implied movement during tactile stimulation
influences localization on the skin surface. Understanding how well tactile sensations can be
localized on the skin surface is an important research question for those working on the sense of
touch. Interestingly, however, the influence of implied motion on tactile localization has not been
investigated before. Using two different experimental approaches, an overall analogue pattern of
localization shifts to the visual and auditory modality is observed. That is, participants perceive the
last location of a dynamic stimulation further along its trajectory. In Experiment 1, participants
judged whether the last vibration in a sequence of three vibrations was located closer to the wrist or
elbow. In Experiment 2, participants indicated the last location on a ruler which was attached to
their forearm. We further pinpoint the effects of implied motion on tactile localization by
investigating the independent influences of motion direction and perceptual uncertainty. Taken
together, these findings underline the importance of dynamic information in localizing tactile stimuli
on the skin. These results also indicate modality specific-differences in the localization of
approaching vs. receding stimuli, hinting at different functions of localization in different modalities.

171

Contributions

Reviewing evidence for superior unconscious processing - Do we
really perceive more than we know?
Sascha Meyen, Ulrike von Luxburg & Volker H Franz

Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, Department of Computer Science
sascha.meyen@uni-tuebingen.de

Many studies found that humans can not consciously perceive a masked prime stimulus when directly
asked to discriminate it in a direct task. Nevertheless, the masked prime can affect responses such as
reaction times in indirect tasks where the prime is not task relevant. This dissociation led to the
interpretation that the prime is better processed unconsciously (in the indirect task) than consciously
(in the direct task). We applied signal detection theory to re-analyze the empirical findings of several
highly influential studies. Surprisingly, most results are to be expected under the assumption of equal
processing capabilities for the prime in direct and indirect tasks. The seeming dissociation is caused
by (a) a larger number of trials in the indirect task and by (b) measuring a continuous response in the
indirect task, while restricting participants to a binary classification in the direct task, which
disadvantages the direct task. Such results do not suffice as indicators for superior unconscious
processing. Nevertheless, some studies survived our test and found a dissociation between direct
and indirect task not caused by methodological issues. These studies used relatively simple visual
stimuli. We hypothesize that a dissociation might exist only for simple stimuli.

Visual dominance in long-term memory for naturalistic scenes:
Evidence from study-test congruency experiments
Hauke S. Meyerhoff1, Frank Papenmeier2 & Markus Huff3

Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien; 2University of Tübingen, Department of Psychology; 3Department of Research
Infrastructures, German Research Institute for Adult Education
h.meyerhoff@iwm-tuebingen.de
1

Memory performance is more accurate for audio-visual rather than purely visual scenes. In previous
work, we have observed evidence for the integration of audio-visual information into a common
memory representation. In the present project, we explore the nature of this memory representation
by manipulating study-test congruency. Our participants memorized a large set of brief excerpts from
Hollywood movies that were presented either audio-visually or purely visual. One day later, they
performed an old/new recognition task. One half of all targets were presented as during study
whereas the other half switched the presentation condition thus violating study-test congruency.
Although targets that were presented audio-visually during study and test elicited the most accurate
memory performance, there was no benefit of targets that were presented visually during study and
test relative to the conditions that violated study-test congruency (e.g., visual during study and
audiovisual during test). However, we were able to obtain a full study-test congruency effect with our
paradigm when we tested audio-visual vs. purely auditory scenes. Therefore, our pattern of results
indicates visual dominance in human long-term memory representations.

172

Contributions

Distractor-induced Deafness
Lars Michael & Maria Robaina Fernández
Medical School Berlin, Department Psychology
lars.michael@medicalschool-berlin.de

To track the transition from unconscious to conscious representation of stimuli a new paradigm has
been proposed; the paradigm of distractor induced blindness (DIB). Previously the paradigm has
been used in visual motion stimuli, supporting the idea that distractors, which share the target’s
feature, trigger a cumulative inhibition process preventing the conscious representation of a target
under temporary conditions (Michael et al., 2012). This data has been proved in various ERPstudies, showing a frontal negativity related to the inhibitory process of the target’s feature. With
increasing number of distractors an increasing negative potential placed in the prefrontal cortex was
observed (Niedeggen et al., 2012). As it seems to be a higher-level cognitive process, we used a
variation of the paradigm in the auditory modality to explore DIB in another sensory modality.
Participants (n= 19) had to detect a salient tone (target) in an stream with coherent and incoherent
distractors. The resulting behavioural data showed the appearance of DIB using auditory distractors.
With increasing number of auditory coherent distractors a lower detection performance of the target
was observed. This supports the notion of a central inhibition process that can deploy regardless of
the sensory system.

"Entschuldigen Sie, dass ich Ihnen einen komplizierten Artikel
schreibe; für einen lesbaren habe ich keine Zeit"
Meik Michalke

Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Abteilung für Diagnostik und Differentielle Psychologie
meik.michalke@hhu.de

Die Lesbarkeit von Texten ist im Informationszeitalter von zunehmender Bedeutung. Es genügt nicht,
Wissen zu verschriftlichen; die resultierenden Texte müssen auch verständlich sein. Zahlreiche
Verfahren wurden vorgeschlagen, um die Lesbarkeit eines Textes aus leicht zu erfassenden
Merkmalen zu errechnen. Zu diesen Merkmalen gehört beispielsweise die durchschnittliche Wortund Satzlänge sowie die Häufigkeit von Fremdwörtern. Das R-Paket 'koRpus' analysiert Texte und
implementiert dabei neben Maßen der lexikalischen Diversität auch mehr als 20 Lesbarkeitsformeln,
einige davon in mehreren Varianten. Seit seiner Erstveröffentlichung im Jahr 2011 hat sich 'koRpus'
zu einer mächtigen Werkzeugsammlung entwickelt, die interdisziplinär in Forschungsprojekten
verwendet wird. Vorgestellt werden die Features und die praktischen Einsatzmöglichkeiten von
'koRpus' und den ergänzenden Paketen 'tm.plugin.koRpus' und 'sylly'. Hierzu gehören Analysen von
einzelnen Texten bis hin zu hierarchisch geordneten Textsammlungen (z.B. Gebrauchsanweisungen,
politischen Reden, journalistischen Texten), die Auswahl und Aufbereitung von Stimulusmaterial für
empirische Studien, sowie die automatische Bestimmung der Sprache, in der ein Text geschrieben
ist.

173

Contributions

Gender effects on cooperation and costly punishment
Laura Mieth, Axel Buchner & Raoul Bell

Heinrich Heine University, Department for Experimental Psychology
laura.mieth@hhu.de

Women are believed to be more cooperative and less egoistic than men. In three experiments, we
examined whether people punish women for failing to live up to this benevolent stereotype.
Participants played a prisoner’s dilemma game with female and male partners which was followed
by a costly punishment option. Participants could spend money to decrease their partners’ payment.
In Experiment 1, participants spent more money to punish defective behavior of female partners than
that of male partners. However, this effect of partner gender on punishment was indirect rather than
direct: Participants cooperated more likely with female partners than with male partners, so that they
had more opportunity for moralistic punishment. In Experiments 2 and 3, we also examined
differences between female and male participants in cooperation and punishment of female and
male partners. Whereas female participants cooperated more with female partners than with male
partners, male participants treated female and male partners equally. Female participants differed
from male participants in that their decisions can be considered more social and less rational from
an economic point of view, consistent with social-role theory and evolutionary accounts.

The influence of decorative pictures on online learning of mathematics
Maria Mikheeva, Günter Daniel Rey & Maik Beege

Chemnitz University of Technology, Psychology of learning with digital media
maria.mikheeva@phil.tu-chemnitz.de

Mathematics is an obligatory subject for many university students. Because of the high level of
abstractness, mathematical tasks are especially difficult to solve for students. This study examined if
adding decorative pictures in the learning texts can lower cognitive load and improve learning
outcomes in mathematical tasks. Although decorative pictures hindered learning in many studies, the
pictures might enhance the learning outcomes if they induced learning-relevant emotions and were
integrated into the context of learning. With this aim, an online experiment with logarithmical tasks
was carried out. The experimental part consisted of two sections each with an emotional decorative
picture, learning text and questions. A 2 × 2 between-subjects design was used with the factors
“picture in the first section” (negative vs. positive) and “picture in the second section” (negative vs.
positive). Overall, 92 students were randomly assigned to the four groups. The results showed no
influences of experimental factors on learning outcomes, cognitive load or emotions. Possibly, the
decorative pictures should be shown on an additional navigation page to be seen more often.
Summarizing, decorative pictures were neither helpful nor harmful to the learning.

174

Contributions

Two routes to aesthetic preference, one route to aesthetic inference
Chantal Allegra Miller & Ronald Hübner

University of Konstanz, Department of Psychology
chantal-allegra.miller@uni-konstanz.de

Aesthetic preferences vary strongly between people across all kinds of aesthetic objects. Yet, whole
sectors of industry are engaged in predicting what the majority of people aesthetically prefers. In the
present study, we investigated the ability of people to infer other´s beauty judgements as well as the
underlying processes. Because aesthetic preference depends on affective-based as well as cognitivebased processes, we asked 40 participants to rate 24 artworks on the dimensions beauty, cognitive
stimulation, and emotionality. Additionally, participants had to infer other people´s assessments
concerning the same stimuli and dimensions. Whereas in the self-assessment condition beauty
correlated positively with emotionality as well as cognitive stimulation (no correlation between
emotionality and cognitive stimulation), in the others-assessment condition beauty correlated highly
only with emotionality. An inter-assessment correlation revealed that about half of the participants
presented a medium to high correlation between their own others-assessments and the other
participant´s self-assessments. Taken together, our results indicate that the ability to infer other´s
aesthetic preferences exists, and that preferences for concrete artworks are inferred via emotional
appraisal, not via appraisal of cognitive stimulation.

How age and attractiveness influence visual attention
Aleksandra Mitrovic & Helmut Leder

University of Vienna, Department of Basic Psychological Research and Research Methods
aleksandra.mitrovic@univie.ac.at

In everyday life, faces surround us. We know that faces and especially attractive faces capture and
bind visual attention. In this study, we were interested in how this effect is modulated by age. To
answer this question, we presented 15 groups of four images each, showing female faces, to male
perceivers. Each quadruple consisted of one more and one less attractive younger and one more
and one less attractive older face (attractiveness matched across age categories). Participants looked
at the quadruples for 20 seconds while we recorded their eye movements. In subsequent blocks, the
quadruplets were presented again and participants rated (a) how much they want to go on a date
with the depicted face (desire/wanting) and (b) how much they like the depicted face
(pleasure/liking). In line with our expectations, we found that more attractive, younger faces were
rated highest according to wanting and liking and were looked at the longest. Additionally, less
attractive, younger faces were rated second highest overall in regards to wanting whereas more
attractive, older faces were rated second highest overall in regards to liking. Thus, the age was more
important in respect to wanting whereas the attractiveness was more important for liking.

175

Contributions

Effects of Emotional Victim Responses on Aggressive Behaviour
Vanessa Mitschke1, Mario Gollwitzer2 & Andreas B Eder1

University of Wuerzburg, Department of Psychology; 2Philipps-Universität Marburg, Department of Psychology
vanessa.mitschke@uni-wuerzburg.de

1

Aggressive acts are carried out with the intention to harm another person. Consequently, the
aggressor has to monitor the victim to match perceived and desired harm doing for a regulation of
aggressive acts. There is an ongoing discussion whether the aggressor wants to see the victim suffer
in a comparable way or if the aggressor wants to deliver a particular message with retaliative
punishment. For a test, we modified a competitive reaction time aggression paradigm that included
controlled emotional victim feedback via video clips. Participants were provoked and given the
opportunity to punish their opponent. The punishment was followed by a short video clip featuring
three distinct emotional reactions of the opponent: (1) anger, (2) sadness, (3) pain, (4) and neutral
displays. We compared the punishment intensity that was selected by the aggressor in the trials
preceding and following the emotional victim feedback. Results showed that the victims’ pain
displays decreased punishment intensity most relative to the other displays. The results suggest that
displays of suffering (pain) have the strongest effect on revenge-seeking motivations.

Temporal predictability of between-task interference in dual tasking:
Foreperiods as contextual cues modulate the backward compatibility
effect
Victor Mittelstädt1, Andrea Kiesel1, Rico Fischer2, Tobias Rieger1 & Roland Thomaschke1

University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology; 2University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology
victor.mittelstaedt@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de
1

In dual-task studies, Task 1 (T1) processing is often influenced from between-task interference caused
by Task 2 (T2) processing. The backward compatibility effect (BCE), for example, shows that Task 1
performance is impaired when the two tasks require spatially incompatible compared to compatible
responses. In the present study, we investigated whether temporal information about harmful
between-task interference, as measured by the BCE, can be utilized to implement control processes
that shield T1 processing from T2 interference. In two experiments, foreperiods (FPs) of different
lengths predicted with a high probability either an incompatible or compatible dual-task trial. We
found that FPs can serve as contextual cue to modulate the BCE which was reflected in reduced BCEs
when FPs predicted an incompatible trial. Thus, this finding provides evidence of context-specific task
shielding in dual-tasking in the absence of exogenous cues. We suggest that control processes to
implement task shielding can be optimized based on temporal expectancies of between-task
interference. One idea of the underlying mechanism is that the degree of limited capacity to select a
T1 response is adjusted based on these expectancies.

176

Contributions

Response-response bindings are binary
Birte Moeller & Christian Frings
Trier University
moellerb@uni-trier.de

Many accounts of human action control assume bindings between stimuli and responses of
individual events (e.g., Hommel, Müsseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2001; Logan, 1988; Schmidt, De
Houwer, & Rothermund, 2016). One widely accepted assumption about these bindings is that they
do not contain temporal order representations regarding the integrated elements. Even though
several theories either explicitly or implicitly include it, this assumption has never been tested directly.
One reason for this lack of evidence is likely that typical stimulus-response binding paradigms are
inapt for such a test. Adapting a new paradigm of response-response binding to include order
switches between response integration and retrieval, we were able to analyze possible
representation of order information in bindings. In the presented experiment (n = 30), binding effects
were identical for intact and switched response orders, indicating that bindings indeed include no
temporal order information. Implications for the role of binding in learning paradigms and for action
control in general are discussed.

Object file binding of irrelevant auditory events: Evidence from the
cross-modal oddball task
Malte Möller1, Susanne Mayr1 & Axel Buchner2

University of Passau, Chair of Psychology and Human-Machine Interaction; 2Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf,
Cognitive and Industrial Psychology
malte.moeller@uni-passau.de

1

Unexpected changes in an otherwise consistent environment are typically associated with behavioral
costs in performance. The present study took advantage of this novelty distraction effect to investigate
whether features of irrelevant auditory stimuli are bound into common representations, so-called
object files. In a cross-modal oddball paradigm, participants performed odd/even judgements on
visually-presented numbers while ignoring one of three task-irrelevant sounds presented from one of
three loudspeakers. For each participant, two unique combinations between sound identity and
speaker location were presented frequently (standards, p = .8) while the remaining combinations
only occurred rarely (deviants, p = .2). Deviants systematically differed from the standards with
respect to identity, location or both. The results showed impaired responding in deviant as compared
with standard trials when deviants solely differed in one feature, i.e. either sound identity or location.
However, no novelty distraction effect was obtained when deviants and standards differed in both
features. This is well in line with the notion that spatial and identity features of task-irrelevant auditory
events are bound into common representations, leading to time-consuming updating of the object file
in the case of partial mismatches.

177

Contributions

Learning novel object classes with very little data
Yaniv Morgenstern, Filipp Schmidt & Roland W. Fleming
Justus-Liebig-University Giessen
yaniv.morgenstern@gmail.com

One of our most remarkable visual abilities is the capacity to learn novel object classes from very
little data. Given just a single novel object, we usually have certain intuitions about what other class
members are likely to look like. Such ‘one-shot learning’ presumably leverages knowledge from
previously learned objects, particularly: (1) by providing a feature space for representing shapes
and their relationships and (2) by learning how classes are typically distributed in this space. To test
this, we used crowdsourcing to obtain responses on unique shapes. On each trial, observers judged
whether a target shape was in the same class as context shape(s). The results reveal that participants
only perceive objects to belong to the same class when they differed from one another by a limited
amount, confirming that observers have restricted generalization gradients around completely novel
stimuli. The findings also reveal a surprisingly consistent distance around each base shape in the
feature space, beyond which objects are deemed to belong to different classes. Thus, a model with
one free parameter describing whether different objects in the same class tend to be from same or
not predicts one-shot learning surprisingly well.

The anticipatory driving interval: the effect of cognitive load and cue
characteristics
Kristin Muehl

Ulm University, Department Human Factors, Institute of Psychology and Education, Faculty of Engineering, Computer
Science and Psychology
kristin.muehl@uni-ulm.de

Anticipatory driving enhances traffic safety and comfortable as well as energy-optimized locomotion.
Based on the perception of characteristic cues prior knowledge is activated and anticipation is
triggered. In order to get closer insights in the cognitive process of anticipation a laboratory
experiment using video-based traffic scenarios was conducted (N = 42). Participants were asked to
indicate from a driver’s perspective the initial suspicion and the obvious anticipation of another car
crossing the own lane. The cognitive demand (high vs. low) and the characteristics of cues were
manipulated in a within-subjects design. Overall an effect of cognitive demand on anticipatory
performance was found for initial suspicion, but not for obvious anticipation, supporting different
processing of the anticipatory interval. Furthermore, multiple evident cues in comparison to single
evident cues facilitate the anticipatory performance. These findings provide the basis for supporting
the anticipatory process in dynamic driving situations.

178

Contributions

Systematisierungsentwurf für fahrfremde Tätigkeiten bei
hochautomatisierter Fahrt
Andreas Lars Mueller & Bettina Abendroth

Technische Universität Darmstadt Institute of Ergonomics & Human Factors
a.mueller@iad.tu-darmstadt.de

Das automatisierte Fahren ist kein Zukunftsszenario mehr und technisch bereits in gewissen
Szenarien umsetzbar. Beim hochautomatisierten Fahren (SAE L3) kann sich der Fahrer gänzlich vom
Fahrgeschehen abwenden und fahrfremde Tätigkeiten für einen gewissen Zeitraum ausführen.
Jedoch hat auch ein hochautomatisiertes System seine Grenzen oder kann ausfallen. Unter diesen
Umständen muss der Mensch in der Lage sein, die Fahraufgabe wieder vollständig zu übernehmen.
In bereits veröffentlichten Forschungsarbeiten zur „Out-of-the-loop-Problematik“ bei teil- und
hochautomatisierter Fahrt zeigt sich, dass vor allem der Wechsel zurück zur manuellen Fahrt in
kritischen als auch in unkritischen Situationen aus arbeitswissenschaftlicher Sicht besonders
herausfordernd ist. Dabei wurden bereits unterschiedliche fahrfremde Tätigkeiten, wie beispielsweise
der Surrogate Reference Task (SuRT), Interaktion mit Mobiltelefon oder das Lesen eines Magazins bei
höher automatisierten Fahrzeugen erforscht. Da die Möglichkeiten von fahrfremde Tätigkeiten im
hochautomatisierten Fahrzeug nahezu unbegrenzt erscheinen, werden diese in einem ganzheitlichen
Betrachtungsansatz systematisiert. Für die weitere Erforschung der Fahraufgabenrückübernahme bei
hochautomatisierter Fahrt, wird daher eine Priorisierung von fahrfremden Tätigkeiten durch
Befragungen und CoverStory-Fahrsimulatorstudien bestimmt. Darauf aufbauend sollen verschiedene
subjektive und psychophysiologische Kapazitätsmessmethoden angewandt werden (u.a.
Blickbewegungsanalyse zur Bestimmung des kognitiven Workloads), um fahrfremden Tätigkeiten in
Ausprägungsstufen zu quantifizieren und beschreiben zu können.

Face adaptation aftereffects on local information
Ronja Mueller1, Sandra Utz2, Claus-Christian Carbon2 & Tilo Strobach1

Medical School Hamburg, Department of Psychology; 2University of Bamberg, Department of Psychology
ronja.mueller@medicalschool-hamburg.de

1

Previously inspected faces can affect the perception of faces seen subsequently. The underlying
mechanisms of these face adaptation aftereffects (FAAE) have been considered to be based on
sensory adaptation. More recent studies however suggest also an adaptation on a representational
basis. Thus, FAAEs are a useful medium to investigate the dynamics and mechanisms of more
complex cognition and also of cognitive plasticity. Although research on adaptation effects in faces
seems to be well-advanced, the specific mechanisms that underlie those effects are still not
completely understood. Research especially lacks a systematic analysis of the robustness and
transferability of the measured effects as well as the involvement of other cognitive conditions such as
rigidity. Furthermore, previous experiments on FAAEs did not yet consider all types of face
information, i.e. they focused primarily on the investigation of adaptation effects on spatial
information. Adaptation effects on local information however are barely investigated. The present
paper considers open issues regarding FAAE-research, develops a research agenda and specifically
addresses the processing and representation of local face information.

179

Contributions

Voice identity perception ability is linked to contrastive aftereffect size
Constanze Mühl & Patricia E.G. Bestelmeyer
Bangor University, School of Psychology
psp670@bangor.ac.uk

There are remarkable individual differences in the ability to differentiate and recognise individuals
by their voice. Here we were interested whether this individual variability in skill, both at the high
and low-level of audition, is linked to adaptive coding of voice identity. In two experiments we
explored first, whether the aftereffect size to two familiar vocal identities can be explained by voice
perception ability and second, whether this effect stems from low-level auditory skill (such as pitch
discrimination ability). In the first experiment, we found that contrastive aftereffect sizes for voice
identity were linked to voice perception ability. In the second experiment, we replicated this finding
and also demonstrated that this effect is not related to more low-level auditory abilities. In addition,
aftereffect sizes in voice identity and a control adaptation condition (adaptation to musical harmony)
did not correlate. Our results highlight the important functional role of adaptive voice coding
mechanisms in voice perception expertise and suggest that human voice perception is a highly
specialised and distinct auditory ability.

Goalkeepers' Reputation Biases Penalty-Kicking Behavior in Soccer
Florian Müller, Jonathan Felix Best & Rouwen Cañal-Bruland
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Department of Sport Psychology
florian.mueller@uni-jena.de

Penalty-takers in soccer adjust their kicking behavior in response to even slight changes in
goalkeepers' position or height. However, height estimates of observed individuals are fragile and
subject to bias. In fact, evidence suggests that goalkeepers with high reputation are judged to be
taller compared to low reputation keepers. Here we examined whether both height and reputation
would affect actual kicking behavior in penalties. Penalty-takers faced goalkeepers of different height
(tall vs. small) and reputation (high vs. low) projected on a life-size screen. They estimated
goalkeepers' height and took actual penalties. First, both height and reputation influenced height
estimates. Tall keepers were judged taller than small keepers. Similarly, high reputation keepers
were judged to be taller as low reputation keepers. Most importantly though, reputation also
influenced kicking behavior. When facing a goalkeeper with a high reputation penalty-takers aimed
further away from the goalkeeper (i.e. kicked closer to the posts) and even missed the goal more
often. Our findings demonstrate that reputation affects height estimates of a goalkeeper, but perhaps
more importantly changes actual shooting behaviors.

180

Contributions

Haptic feedback improves number magnitude estimation
Jennifer Müller1, Uwe Oestermeier2, Korbinian Moeller3 & Peter Gerjets4

Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen, LEAD Graduate School & Research Network; 2Leibniz-Institut für
Wissensmedien, Software Development Department; 3Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien, Neuro-cognitive Plasticity
Lab; 4Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien, Multimodal Interaction Lab
jennifer.mueller@lead.uni-tuebingen.de
1

Can manual exploration of objects facilitate learning of the abstract concept of numerical magnitude
by different types of haptic feedback? The present study examined the influence of haptic feedback
on bodily representations of number magnitude. 59 adult participants were asked to indicate the
magnitude of numbers 1 to 10 by adjusting the distance between their thumb and index finger.
Afterwards participants had to sort wooden rods of different physical lengths representing the
respective numbers in an embodied training. Half of the participants were instructed to grasp the
rods lengthwise between thumb and index finger. Thereby, they received haptic feedback about the
length of the respective number rods, meaning wider grip aperture for larger numbers. The other half
grasped the rods widthwise, and thus, they got no haptic feedback about the length of the respective
number-rods. As expected, participants who received haptic feedback of number magnitude by
grasping rods lengthwise during training performed significantly better than the widthwise grasping
group, when asked to indicate the magnitudes of numbers 1 to 10 as the distance between fingers
again. These results suggest that haptic feedback of physical magnitudes facilitates an internal
scaling of number magnitudes corroborating the notion of embodied numerosity.

Forget the fairy tale of accuracy-effort trade-offs: mental models and
availability of internal information determine heuristic application
Jörg Müller

Justus Liebig University, Institute of Agribusiness Management and Food Economics
joerg.mueller@agrar.uni-giessen.de

In past decades, various heuristic strategies have been described theoretically and proven
empirically. However, there is still only limited knowledge about underlying reasons for their
application in specific situations. Effort accuracy trade-off is one commonly explanatory approach.
This study examines additional factors for the application of heuristic strategies in familiar decision
situations. This was done by an incentivized lab experiment with information search tracking: 145
real decision makers (operative managers) had to solve seven familiar inference tasks with real
alternatives. The presented information about alternatives (18 attributes and brand name) can be
used in three kinds of decision strategies: (1) Memory-based: brand names can be used to recall
alternatives’ past performance. (2) Model-based: inferences about performance based on mental
models using information about single attribute values. (3) Combinations of these strategies. In most
cases (82.7%) combined strategies are observed, while memory-based (6.3%) and model-based
strategies (11.0%) are more rarely applied. Decision effort and strategy selection are independent of
decision magnitude. However, task variations and availability of internal information (experience
with alternatives) result in different decision effort. These results indicate that instead of effort
accuracy trade-offs, mental models and availability of internal information determine the application
of heuristic strategies

181

Contributions

Differential emotion-induced effects on the efficiency of cognitive
control throughout adolescent development
Lena Müller, Hannah Ritter & Jutta Kray

Saarland University, Department of Psychology
lenamuller5@aol.com

Developmental theories assume that mid-adolescents are less able to down-regulate their emotions,
due to an early maturation of the socio-emotional system but later maturation of the cognitive control
system during adolescence. To investigate this, we examined the ability to withhold and initiate
responding in the presence of different emotional contents. We applied an Emotional Go-Nogo Task
in which participants were either to respond (Go) or to not respond (Nogo) to neutral, happy, and
angry faces. We measured false alarm rates (FA; responding on Nogo trials) as index of response
inhibition and hit rates (Hits) as index of response initiation and compared them between children (911 years), mid-adolescents (12-14 years) and late-adolescents (15-18 years). We found a decrease
of FA and an increase of Hits with increasing age, in line with age-related improvements in cognitive
control. While children’s FA were not sensitive to emotional contents, mid-adolescents showed higher
FA for emotional than for neutral faces, irrespective of their valence, and late-adolescents only
produced higher FA for angry faces, indicating an increased differentiation of processing emotional
contents throughout development. All age groups showed higher Hits for happy than angry stimuli,
suggesting that positive emotions can foster response initiation early in development.

Does task asymmetry determine the influence of anticipated partner
reactions on task set selection?
Romy Müller, Elisabeth Wienß & Hanna Bärwinkel

TU Dresden, Professur Ingenieurpsychologie und angewandte Kognitionsforschung
romy.mueller@tu-dresden.de

Contingent partner reactions influence actions control. Previous studies on task set selection suggest
that such influences depend on relative task strength: While a standard compatibility benefit emerges
in the stronger one of two conflicting tasks, it is absent or reverses in the weaker. However, previous
studies manipulated asymmetry between qualitatively different tasks rather than systematically
varying it within one task type. Therefore, in two experiments subjects had to select between two
tasks of the same type (i.e., selection of a green vs. purple sudden onset among grey distractors). In
Experiment 1, there was no asymmetry as the targets for both tasks were similarly salient, while in
Experiment 2 asymmetry resulted from one target being more salient than the other. After each
reaction a partner responded compatibly or incompatibly. Without task asymmetry, compatible
reactions speeded up performance and reduced fixations to distractors in both tasks. For asymmetric
tasks, we did observe the expected pattern, with only the stronger task producing compatibility
benefits. However, the interaction was not significant. The results suggest that some asymmetry is
insufficient to produce differential compatibility effects. However, it remains to be investigated
whether asymmetry needs to be stronger or tasks need to be qualitatively different.

182

Contributions

Interactions of approximate number processing skills with numeracy
and executive functions in decision making under risk
Silke M. Müller1, Margarete Delazer2 & Matthias Brand3

Universität Duisburg-Essen, General Psychology: Cognition; 2Clinical Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical
University; 3General Psychology: Cognition and Center for Behavioral Addiction Research (CeBAR), University of
Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg Erwin L. Hahn Institute for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
silke.m.mueller@uni-due.de
1

Research aim: Research has shown that different numerical skills influence decision making (e.g.
Peters & Bjalkebring, 2015). It has been shown that high normative numerical skills (numeracy)
compensate for the negative impact of weak executive functions on decision making under risk. The
current study investigates compensatory effects of further, more basal, numerical skills, namely
approximate number processing. Methods: Two groups of participants (n=64 each) performed either
the Game of Dice Task (GDT) or the GDT-Double, which places more emphasis on probability
processing in decisions under risk. Additionally, both groups performed a dot-comparison task
assessing approximate number processing, the Modified Card Sorting Test (MCST) measuring
executive functions, and a numeracy task. Results: Performance in the MCST and the dot-comparison
task significantly interacted in predicting GDT performance in both groups, with higher effect size in
the original GDT. There was no three-way interaction with ‘group’. Overall, however, the three
predictors ‘executive functions’, ‘numeracy’, and ‘approximate number processing’ all interacted, in
a way that especially those individuals with deficits in all three competencies made significantly
more risky choices. Discussion: The results indicate that approximate number processing skills may
compensate for decision-making deficits due to lack of normative numerical skills or weak executive
functions.

Seeing the world through the eyes of an avatar
Jochen Müsseler & Christian Böffel

RWTH Aachen University, Work and Cognitive Psychology
muesseler@psych.rwth-aachen.de

In virtual environments, we often interact with avatars and take the world from their perspective. The
present experiments examine a situation, in which an actor observes and controls an avatar from
different spatial perspectives. The avatar was presented in top view on a display and its perspective
was varied by different angles of rotation relative to the actor. In this case, the spatial stimulusresponse relationships from the avatar’s perspective could deviate from the actor’s perspective.
Therefore, compatibility tasks were introduced to determine which stimulus-response relationship
determines compatibility, the perspective of the avatar or the perspective of the actor. The results
showed that stimulus-response compatibility went with the avatar (and not with the actor), when the
stimulus position is necessary to complete the task at hand. Further, compatibility went even with the
avatar, when stimulus position is irrelevant for the task (Simon effect) — but only if certain conditions
are met.

183

Contributions

“Sad, thus true” or “too good to be true”? Separating negativity and
positivity biases in judgments of truth
Lena Nadarevic

Universität Mannheim
nadarevic@psychologie.uni-mannheim.de

The statement “80% of marriages last ten years or longer” carries the same meaning as the
statement “20% of marriages get divorced within the first ten years”. Nevertheless, the two
statements differ in one important way: The first statement is framed positively whereas the latter one
is framed negatively. Several studies have found higher truth judgments for negatively compared to
positively framed statements. However, it is unclear if negative framing increases perceived truth
(negativity bias), if positive framing decreases perceived truth (positivity bias), or if both effects
contribute to the framing effect. To answer this question, the current experiment used statements that
contained both frames as a baseline condition (e.g., 80% of marriages last ten years or longer and
20% of marriages get divorced within the first ten years). Compared to this baseline condition, truth
judgments were higher in a negative frame condition and lower in a positive frame condition.
However, the negative framing effect was much larger than the positive one. Hence, negativity as
well as positivity biases contribute to the framing effect on judgments of truth, albeit to different
degrees.

Working Memory Capacity Facilitates the Generation of Free Choices
Christoph Naefgen & Markus Janczyk
Tübingen University, Cognition and Action
christoph.naefgen@uni-tuebingen.de

Free choice tasks are tasks in which two or more equally valid response options per stimulus exist. In
investigations of the putative difference between voluntary and stimulus-determined actions, they are
often contrasted with forced choice tasks, in which only one response option is considered correct.
Repeatedly, responses in free choice tasks have been demonstrated to be slower compared to forced
choice task responses, and it was suggested that free choice tasks are in fact random generation
tasks. Here, we tested the prediction that in this case randomness should suffer under increased
working memory (WM) load with two complementary free choice experiments. In Experiment 1,
participants were provided with varying levels of external WM support in the form of displayed
previous choices, and in Experiment 2, WM load was induced via a concurrent n-back task. In
general the data confirm the prediction: In Experiment 1, WM support improved both speed and
randomness of responses. In Experiment 2, responses slowed down with increasing WM load and
randomness decreased as well. These result help to pinpoint potential differences between free and
forced choice tasks.

184

Contributions

Effects of motor imagery on postural control in quiet stance
Tim Naumann, Adam Zabicki, Johannes Kurz & Jörn Munzert

Justus-Liebig-University, Department of Sports Science
tim.naumann@sport.uni-giessen.de

According to the Simulation Theory by Jeannerod (2001), the imagination and the execution of an
action share the same neural substrates. Furthermore, recent studies showed that imagining oneself
executing a fast reaction task with different loads, leads to specific modulation of postural control
(Boulton & Mitra, 2015). The aim of this study was to examine whether for an imagined continuous
movement, specific characteristics like load, speed or amplitude lead to specific adaptations in
postural control. 16 participants (12 female, age: 25 ±4.08 years) imagined or executed repetitive
shoulder abduction movements while standing in tandem position. The movements varied in load that
had to be lifted (0, 1.5 or 3 kg), speed (1.5, 2.25 or 3 s/movement cycle) and amplitude (30°, 60°
or 90°). Body sway as a measure for postural control was recorded with a force plate (AMTI,
Watertown, MA). Results showed that the sway increased significantly when participants executed
movements with higher load, speed or amplitude. In motor imagery conditions, none of these effects
could be found. One possible explanation could be that demands on postural control in repetitive
movements are lower compared to fast reaction tasks that were used in previous studies.

The first sight does not matter: Gender as the first cue on job
applications
Nadine Nett, Tillmann Nett, Robert Gaschler & Andreas Glöckner
FernUniversität in Hagen, Institut für Psychologie
nadine.nett@fernuni-hagen.de

One of the first pieces of information an employer receives of a job applicant is their gender. There
is substantial evidence that the gender of an applicant biases the decision to hire them. Currently
gender biases in hiring are mainly studied by sending CVs and application forms to potential
employers or consultants. In previous research we attempted to replicate the current findings in a
laboratory setting by having participants decide for one of two applicants based on expert
recommendations. Contrary to results from hiring studies, no effect of gender could be found.
Therefore, in a pre-registered experiment (N=109) we attempted to identify the cause for our failure
to conceptually replicate the existing studies. In the novel experiment we added a manipulation, in
which we presented the irrelevant gender information by itself before showing any valid cues to
some of the participants. In addition we adapted our analysis by performing individual strategy
identification for all participants using a Bayesian framework. As in our previous study, however, no
influence of the gender information could be found for either group of the participants. Instead we
found that the participants followed a rational strategy selecting the applicant which was objectively
better.

185

Contributions

Theoretical and Empirical Comparison of Parallel Constraint
Satisfaction and Leaky Accumulator Models
Tillmann Nett & Andreas Glöckner

FernUniversität in Hagen, Institut für Psychologie
tillmann.nett@fernuni-hagen.de

The parallel constraint satisfaction (PCS) model is a neural network frequently used in research on
decision making. According to this model, information is integrated based on the principle of
coherency. Therefore, this model can predict not only the decision, confidence judgments, and
response times but also coherence shifts in which the validities of the cues are re-evaluated during
the decision process. In research on perceptual choice and in machine learning, however, leaky
accumulator or leaky integrator (LI) networks are more common. We compare these two networks
mathematically, and show that both types of networks can be understood as instances of a more
general class of networks, which we call Adaptive Memory Leaky Integrator (AMeLI) networks.
Through this analysis, we show that the commonalities of all instances of this class go beyond
superficial similarities of the governing equations, but rather that all instances are driven by the same
underlying principles. Therefore, LI and PCS must make very similar predictions in most cases and
research on LI networks may also be applied to PCS and vice versa. Finally, we show that the
additional complexity of PCS vs. LI networks is required to fit data from experiments on decision
making.

Brighter is not always better: High salience can slow responses to
warning signals
Christiane R. Neubert1, Wolfgang Einhäuser2, Sabine Grimm3 & Alexandra Bendixen1

Chemnitz University of Technology, Institute of Physics - Cognitive Systems Lab; 2Chemnitz University of Technology,
Institute of Physics - Physics of Cognition Group; 3Leipzig University, Institute of Psychology - Cognitive and Biological
Psychology; Chemnitz University of Technology, Institute of Physics - Cognitive Systems Lab
wolfgang.einhaeuser-treyer@physik.tu-chemnitz.de
1

It seems widely accepted that warning signals should be maximally salient. Yet, though highly salient
signals might be efficient in capturing attention, they might distract from task execution. To test this
hypothesis, we combined a visual primary task with visual and auditory warning signals. Participants
reported the location of a small gap in sequentially presented central squares. Occasionally, this
primary-task stimulus was accompanied by a peripheral "alert square". The alert square was
surrounded by a frame and coincided with a congruently lateralized tone. Participants had to report
the location of the gap in the alert square before proceeding with the primary task. When the
frame's contrast or the tone's intensity were increased, participants directed their gaze to the alert
square more quickly. Increasing tone intensity yielded quicker responses to the alert square and to
the subsequent primary task. Increasing the frame's contrast did not yield a similar benefit, as it
increased the time from fixating the alert square to responding. Further experiments revealed that the
balance between gaze and response time critically depended on the frame’s presentation duration.
In conclusion, too high visual salience can interfere with task performance and nullify more efficient
attentional guidance towards the warning signal.

186

Contributions

The effect of event photographs on second-language learning of
Vietnamese collocations
Huong Thi Thu Nguyen, Katja Münster, Carsten Schliewe & Pia Knoeferle
Humboldt University of Berlin, Department of German Language and Linguistics
nguyetxh@hu-berlin.de

We investigated whether event photographs can facilitate Vietnamese verb-noun collocation learning
in adult German second language learners. We manipulated two independent factors: visual context
(presence vs absence of event photographs) and language context (1:1 vs. 1:many verb-noun
mappings). In Experiment 1 (N=32), participants saw the same object pictures in training and
testing. At testing, they completed a spoken verb by selecting a noun referent (an object
photograph). In Experiment 2, a further 32 participants heard the full verb-noun collocation and
selected the matching one of two event photographs; event pictures differed between training and
testing, rendering the learning task arguably more difficult. While the analyses failed to corroborate
an effect of event photographs in either participants’ accuracy or their reaction times in Experiment
1, reliable effects of event presence emerged in Experiment 2: Participants were significantly more
accurate and faster in identifying the collocation by selecting the correct event photograph when
they had (vs. had not) seen supportive events during learning. The main effect of language context
and the interaction between verb-noun mappings and event photograph presence was nonsignificant in both experiments. Thus, event photographs can facilitate second language learning but
only in a suitable learning and testing context.

Expectancy for social participation: ERP correlates of a recalibration
process
Michael Niedeggen1 & Kerschreiter Rudolf2

FU Berlin, Experimental Psychology and Neuropsychology; 2FU Berlin, Social, Organizational and Economic
Psychology
michael.niedeggen@fu-berlin.de
1

Previous event-related brain potential (ERP) studies indicated that the threat of social needs elicited in
a cyberball paradigm is determined by the deviation between expected and perceived participation
- as reflected by the P3 amplitude. Expectancy, however, is not a set point, but might be adjusted
within an experimental run. Re-analyzing two independent data sets (Weschke & Niedeggen, 2015;
Niedeggen et al., 2014), we aimed to test this hypothesis: In the first study (n=15), an inclusionary
experimental block (ball reception 33%, two co-players) was followed by a partial-exclusion block
(16%). In the second study (n=20), an inclusionary block (33%) was followed by overinclusion
(46%). For both data sets, a split-half analysis revealed a significant reduction of the P3 amplitude
within each block. If the P3 responses registered in the first half of each block were related to the
participants’ questionnaire reports, significant correlations can neither be found for a transition to
partial exclusion (r=.19), nor for a transition to overinclusion (r=-.11). In contrast, the corresponding
correlations were significantly expressed for the P3 amplitudes based on the second half of each run
(r=.56, and r=.53). We suppose that the recalibration of expectation contributes to differences in the
sensitivity to exclusion.

187

Contributions

Sleep strengthens integration of spatial memory systems
Hannes Noack1, Christian F. Doeller2 & Jan Born3

University Tübingen, Medical School Department of Psychiatry; 2Trondheim University Hospital, Kavli Institute for
Systems Neuroscience; 3University Tübingen, Institute for Medical Psychology and Behavioral Neurobiology
hannes.noack@uni-tuebingen.de

1

Spatial memory comprises different representational systems that are sensitive to different
environmental cues like proximal landmarks or local boundaries. While sleep supports systems
memory consolidation, its effects on spatial memory representations are unclear. Here we examined
how sleep affects landmark-referenced and boundary-referenced spatial representations and their
integration. In the main study, participants (n=42) were familiarized with an environment featuring
both a proximal landmark and a local boundary, before nocturnal sleep or wake periods. After
another night of sleep, participant’s capability to integrate spatial cues was tested: To this end,
participants learned new object locations within the familiar environment with only the landmark or
the boundary present. At retrieval, spatial cues were exchanged, such that boundary referenced
objects had to be retrieved relative to the landmark and vice-versa. Results indicate a distinctly
increased flexibility in using either landmarks or boundaries for navigation, when familiarization to
the environment was followed by sleep than wakefulness. A second control study (n = 45) did not
reveal effects of sleep (versus wakefulness) on navigation in environments featuring only landmarks
or only boundaries. Thus, rather than strengthening isolated representational systems per se, sleep
presumably through forming an integrative representation, enhances flexible coordination within
representational systems.

Cognitive control in multimodal attention shifting - Electrophysiological
and behavioral evidence
Sophie Nolden, Sophia von Salm & Iring Koch

RWTH Aachen University, Cognitive and Experimental Psychology
nolden@psych.rwth-aachen.de

We investigated behavioral and electrophysiological correlates of cognitive control in multimodal
attention shifting. Participants were presented a bimodal target stimulus comprising a tone and a
visually presented circle. Both the tone and the circle could either be clear or noisy, and this was
varied independently in the auditory and visual modality. The bimodal target stimulus could thus be
congruent, i.e., when both the tone and the circle were either clear or noisy, or incongruent, i.e.,
when the tone was clear and the circle was noisy or vice versa. Participants had to attend to only
one sensory modality and perform a clear/noisy classification task. The relevant modality of each
trial was indicated by a preceding letter cue, so that the relevant modality repeated or switched
randomly from trial to trial. Performance was impaired when participants switched between sensory
modalities. In addition, crossmodal congruency effects were sequentially modulated, but only when
the relevant modality repeated. This finding was mirrored in the electrophysiological data. The study
thus suggests that modality shifting leads to a shift in the episodic context and thus to an attentional
reset.

188

Contributions

Bridging the gap between science and practice – Affect Misattribution
Procedure as ecological and easy to manage tool to measure implicit
brand attitudes
Mandy Nuszbaum & Tanja Krause

FOM University of Applied Sciences, Business Psychology
mandy.nuszbaum@fom.de

Consumer behavior is not only determined by explicit thoughts and attitudes. Even though, a couple
of studies show promising effects using implicit measures within consumer research, they have not
been employed as standard in practice. Within three studies, the Affect Misattribution Procedure
(AMP; Payne, Cheng, Govorun, & Stewart, 2005) has been explored as an ecological and easy to
manage tool measuring brand attitudes. In study 1, we used positive vs. negative brand logos as
primes and neutral Chinese characters as targets. As expected, brand attitude was misattributed
toward neutral Chinese characters and led to significant more positive evaluations after exposure to
positive vs. negative primes. In study 2, we used the same primes as in study 1. As targets, neutral
barcodes were employed, which are closer to consumer context. Again, misattribution toward
neutral barcodes could be observed in the expected direction. In study 3, we used positive brand
names/brand concepts vs. nonwords as primes. Barcodes were used as targets. The results showed,
more positive evaluations following positive brand-concept primes compared to the no brand-concept
primes. In sum, AMP seems to be a promising tool and easy to use for market researchers, which
might be employed for different materials.

Validierung der Driving Anger Scale (DAS) für deutsche Autofahrer
Michael Oehl1 & Stefan Brandenburg2

Leuphana Universität Lüneburg; 2Technische Universität Berlin
oehl@uni.leuphana.de

1

Driving Anger ist assoziiert mit aggressivem, unangepasstem Fahrverhalten sowie mit einem höheren
Risiko von Verkehrsunfällen. Daher ist Driving Anger ein breit untersuchtes Konzept von
verkehrspsychologischer Relevanz. Zahlreiche Studien in unterschiedlichen Ländern um die ganze
Erde herum haben Driving Anger und das dazu meist verwendete Messinstrument, die Driving Anger
Scale (DAS; Deffenbacher et al., 1994), überprüft. Dabei zeigten sich oft kulturelle Unterschiede, so
dass beispielsweise einzelne Items oder ganze Subskalen der Driving Anger Scale entfernt oder
modifiziert werden mussten, um eine kulturspezifische Validierung zu gewährleisten. Eine aktuelle,
breite Validierung der Driving Anger Scale für deutsche Autofahrer fehlt bisher. Brandenburg et al.
(2017) führten eine Validierung für deutsche Taxifahrer durch, die zeigte, dass die Driving Anger
Scale für diese Gruppe der Autofahrer in Deutschland angepasst werden muss. In der aktuell
vorliegenden Studie wird eine Validierung der Driving Anger Scale für normale Autofahrer (N =
1136) durchgeführt. Die Probanden füllten die Driving Anger Scale (Deffenbacher et al., 1994)
sowie zur Überprüfung der Konstruktvalidität die deutsche Version des State-Trait-ÄrgerausdrucksInventars (STAXI; Schwenkmezger et al., 1992) aus. Eine konfirmatorische Faktorenanalyse ergab
eine akzeptable Modellpassung der Driving Anger Scale mit ihren 33 Items in sechs Subskalen für
die deutschen Daten. Implikationen werden diskutiert.

189

Contributions

Investigating the relationship between confidence and manual
movement during decision making
Denis O'Hora1, Arkady Zgonnikov2, Aisling Kenny1 & Kongfatt Wong-Lin3

National University of Ireland, Galway School of Psychology; 2University of Aizu, Complex Systems Modeling
Laboratory; 3Ulster University School of Computing, Engineering & Intelligent Systems
denis.ohora@nuigalway.ie

1

Making a decision requires us to evaluate a number of options and act to obtain the result we prefer.
It is well established that, if evaluation processes persist during movement, the relative valence of
available decision options influences decision movement; greater differences in valence induce
faster, shorter and less complex responses. It is also well known that greater disparity in option
valence induces greater post-decision confidence. Nevertheless, the relationship between decision
movement and confidence remains relatively unexamined. In the current study, twenty-eight
participants viewed noisy visual stimuli (random dot kinematograms) and reported the dominant
direction of the stimuli using a computer mouse. Coherence (stimulus intensity) of the stimulus was
experimentally manipulated across four levels. On completion of each response, participants
gambled a number of points from 10 to 50; if they were correct, they gained the points and if they
were incorrect, they lost the points. Mouse trajectory information was not predictive of post-decision
certainty, but was strongly related to decision accuracy. Expected relationships among stimulus
quality, decision accuracy, response time and confidence were also observed. The findings support
an interpretation of decision confidence as dependent on evidence evaluation processes that
continue to operate after a decision.

Rule-based strategies and integration of cues in unsupervised
judgement
Tjasa Omerzu1, Maarten Speekenbrink2 & Janina Anna Hoffmann3

University of Konstanz, Graduate School of Decision Sciences; 2University College London, Department of
Experimental Psychology, Division of Psychology and Language Sciences; 3University of Konstanz, Department of
Psychology
tjasa.omerzu@uni-konstanz.de

1

Everyday judgments, such as judging the attractiveness of a new acquaintance, often require
integrating several pieces of information, without providing an objectively correct answer or getting
feedback. Although these unsupervised judgments are an essential part of daily life, judgment
research has neglected which cues people consider in those situations and how they integrate this
information. Categorization research suggests that people only consider a single cue in the absence
of feedback - predominantly the most variable one. The present study aims to investigate on which
cues people base their judgments in judgment tasks without feedback and to what degree people
jointly consider several pieces of information. Particularly, we investigate if people preferably
consider cues providing highly variable information or cues conveying more information. Second,
we investigate to what degree people only rely on one cue or integrate information from several
cues. To test those predictions, participants repeatedly judge abstract stimuli consisting of three cues.
In this initial judgment phase, we systematically single out one cue that differs from the two others
either in variance or informativeness. A final decision stage then allows to discriminate across
conditions which information people primarily base their judgments on in unsupervised judgment.

190

Contributions

Instruction manipulations during dual-memory retrieval practice: Can
they eliminate a retrieval stage processing bottleneck?
Franziska Orscheschek1, Timothy Rickard2, Torsten Schubert3 & Tilo Strobach1

Medical School Hamburg, Department of Psychology; 2University of California San Diego, Department of
Psychology; 3Martin-Luther Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Department of Psychology
franziska.orscheschek@medicalschool-hamburg.de

1

The study investigated the role of instruction manipulations and the associated cognitive architecture
of learned retrieval parallelism in the context of dual-memory retrieval from a single cue. So far, dualmemory retrieval research in this context focused on response strategies that subjects naturally
adapted during practice. Results of these studies indicated the presence of learned retrieval
parallelism for a subset of subjects that exhibited a synchronized response strategy. This form of
retrieval parallelism is cue-specific, consistent with the set-cue retrieval bottleneck model. To extend
these findings, subjects in the present study were instructed by the experimenter to apply a
synchronized response strategy across three sessions of dual-memory retrieval practice with one set
of cues (old cues). Following this practice on old cues, the cue-specificity of potential learned
parallelism was investigated with the presentation of another set of new dual-retrieval cues.
Preliminary results indicate the possibility to instruct learned parallelism and to influence the
efficiency of dual-memory retrieval. Further results specify the dual-memory retrieval bottleneck with
respect to the set-cue bottleneck model in the context of instructed learned parallelism.

Coping with kitsch: Aesthetic appreciation and the dynamics of social
motivation
Stefan Andreas Ortlieb & Claus-Christian Carbon

Lehrstuhl für Allgemeine Psychologie und Methodenlehre der Universität Bamberg
stefan.ortlieb@uni-bamberg.de

In 20th century art criticism the term “kitsch” has been frequently used to contrast “high art”
(Greenberg, 1939). This distinction raises an interesting question: If kitsch is considered aesthetically
worthless why is it so tremendously popular? Norman (2004) claims that we value keepsakes mainly
because they cheer us up on a rainy day. Does kitsch actually help people to cope with uncertainty
and negative emotions? If this is the case, appreciation of kitsch should be dynamically related to
feelings of security and self-determination: Whenever people feel vulnerable and dependent, they
should become more susceptible to its familiar, clear-cut, benign, and therefore reassuring qualities.
Based on these considerations we present a functional model which relates preferences for familiarity
(or novelty respectively), determinacy (ambiguity) and fluent processing (cognitive mastery) to two
basic needs of social motivation (Bischof, 1989): security and arousal. Besides, results of an
experimental study are presented which show that decorative objects are rated less kitschy after in
sensu exposure to existential threats. Our model also allows for an integration of other recent
findings on art perception and design evaluation. Finally, it opens an entirely new research
perspective for empirical aesthetics by taking phenomena of popular aesthetics into consideration.

191

Contributions

Structural similarities between response categories and response
layout facilitate processing of overlapping categories
Anton Öttl1, Dawn Marie Behne1, Martine Aune1, Pascal Gygax2 & Ute Gabriel1

Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Department of Psychology; 2University of Fribourg, Department
of Psychology
anton.oettl@ntnu.no
1

For a series of experiments in which response times were measured in parallel for three partially
overlapping response categories (i.e., male, female and mixed faces), we designed a task in which
response buttons were laid out analogously to the response categories: whereas the categories male
and female were associated with unimanual responses, the mixed category was associated with a
bimanual response, mirroring the composite nature of this category. The present study investigates
how this approach to designing a response layout affects the processing of corresponding response
categories by replicating the experiment with a non-analogue sequential design in which the three
response alternatives were associated with three different fingers. To isolate motoric aspects from
other aspects of processing, both experiments contained baselines in which the task was merely to
press the relevant buttons as quickly as possible. Results suggest that from a purely motoric point of
view, a sequential design is easier to deal with, as response times were fastest in this baseline. For
the categorization task however, the sequential design had the slowest response times, indicating
that an analogue layout facilitates processing. These findings highlight the importance of considering
the structural correspondence between response categories and response layout.

Training improves recall precision for colours of novel objects
Rebecca Ovalle Fresa & Nicolas Rothen
University of Bern, Institute of Psychology
rebecca.ovalle@psy.unibe.ch

Training can enhance higher cognitive functions (e.g., memory). Due to binary response paradigms,
enhancements are almost exclusively observed on quantitative levels (e.g., probability of successful
recall from memory). However, it remains to be elucidated if training can also result in qualitative
enhancements (e.g., precision of recalled memory representations). Using an object-color association
task and a mixture modeling approach to estimate recall precision and recall probability, we
investigated if training can enhance color representations in visual long-term memory (VLTM). Over
the course of several training sessions, participants learnt specific object-color associations.
Thereafter, participants’ recall abilities were tested for novel object-color associations. Recall
precision and probability improved for the specific object-color associations over the course of the
training. Crucially, enhanced recall precision and probability were also observed for novel objectcolor associations after the training. A control group confirmed that the effect was due to training
and not due to test repetition. We conclude that cognitive training can also improve qualitative
aspects of human cognition.

192

Contributions

The resolution of complex anaphors
Till Pachalli, Jessica Strozyk, Carolin Dudschig & Barbara Kaup
University of Tübingen, Department of Psychology
till.pachalli@uni-tuebingen.de

Complex anaphors are nominal expressions which are coreferential with propositionally structured
antecedents, such as events. Referents of nominal expressions are represented as tokens in mental
discourse models. The phenomenon of complex anaphors thus raises the question whether an event
that is referred to by a propositional expression is immediately represented by means of a complex
token in the mental model, or alternatively whether such a reification process takes place only if a
complex anaphor is processed. As establishing new mental tokens is known to be costly, reading
times of sentences with complex anaphors can give indication of the time point at which the
reification of events takes place. We composed small texts consisting of an introductory sentence, a
sentence referring to a target event, and a sentence with a coreferential complex anaphor.
Depending on the version, the introductory sentence either did or did not include a cataphoric
expression forcing the reification process to take place before the complex anaphor is being read in
the final sentence. Reading times of the final sentences were indeed shorter in the former compared
to the latter case, indicating that the reification of events takes place only when needed.

Paved with Gut Intuitions? Dissecting Differences between Intuitive
and Deliberate Decision Makers in Complex Risky Decisions
Thorsten Pachur1, Helen Steingroever2 & Michael M. Lee3

Max Planck Institute for Human Development; 2University of Amsterdam; 3University of Irvine
pachur@mpib-berlin.mpg.de
1

Previous studies have found that a person's decision style (i.e., intuitive, affective vs. deliberate,
planned), identified via self-report measures, can be associated with differences in performance in
some decision tasks. Here we investigate whether differences in decision style are associated with
differences in behavior on the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT), one of the most popular experimental
paradigms to study complex risky decision making. It has been suggested that intuitive, affective
processes play a key role in the IGT, and intuitive decision makers might thus perform differently than
deliberate decision makers. Participants completed the IGT as well as an extensive self-report
decision-style inventory. Using an ensemble of Bayesian methods—encompassing Bayesian ANOVA,
hierarchical Bayesian modeling with the prospect valence delta (PVL) model, and latent-mixture
analyses—we found only minor differences between intuitive and deliberate decision makers on the
IGT. The PVL model analyses suggested that the cognitive processes when completing the IGT are
rather similar between the decision-style groups. Group classifications with latent-mixture analyses of
participants’ behavior on the IGT did not recover the intuitive vs. deliberate groups. Our results
suggest that measures of decision style might be rather unrelated to how people behave in
experimental decision tasks.

193

Contributions

The development and validation of an academic self-forgiveness scale
Shama Padke & Raven Rinas

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet, Psychology
S.Padke@campus.lmu.de

Self-forgiveness can contribute to positive well-being (Hall & Finchman, 2005), however few
empirical studies have examined this phenomenon, particularly within the academic domain. This
study reports the development of a self-assessment instrument designed to measure academic selfforgiveness, providing preliminary grounds for the importance of assessing self-forgiveness in
students. The scale was developed through modification of the Heartland Forgiveness Scale (HFS;
Thompson et al., 2005) including only self-forgiveness items specific to the academic domain. The
scale was administered to a sample of university students, alongside measures of general
forgiveness, academic self-concept and perceived stress. Exploratory factor analysis and item
analyses were used to confirm construct unidimensionality, and evaluate indices of item difficulty,
item discrimination, and scale reliability, respectively. In parallel to ASC theory (Marsh, 1990), it is
hypothesized that self-forgiveness is domain-specific, and positively correlates with ASC, establishing
convergent validity. Individuals with a higher propensity to self-forgive are expected to score lower
on measures of stress, establishing divergent validity. Given that ASC is a strong predictor of
academic achievement, this scale may serve as a diagnostic tool in educational settings to target
students who may benefit from self-forgiveness interventions as a means to promote academic wellbeing.

Measuring potency in words with the semantic differential
Marina Palazova1, Birgit Stürmer1 & Annekathrin Schacht2

International Psychoanalytic University Berlin; 2Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
marina.palazova@ipu-berlin.de

1

Dimensional models of affect emphasize the dimensions of valence and arousal. Shortly, the third
dimension of affect - potency, that is whether a stimulus is experienced as powerful or not - is gaining
attention. Explanatory significance of potency may be high because it may differentiate between
affective states that are similar on the other two dimensions (e.g. anger and fear, both highly
negative and arousing), but imply contrary behavior tendencies (fight versus flight, respectively). Until
now, instruments for measuring potency are scarce. While the self-assessment-mannequins(SAM)
measures the dimension of dominance, that is whether the agent feels dominant or dominated by a
stimulus, it does not capture the potency of the stimulus. We, therefore, developed a three scale
version of the semantic differential(SD). Separate groups of participants rated 480 words with the
SAM and the SD. Valence and arousal showed high correlations between the instruments, while
potency showed an intermediate correlation. Within SAM potency was highly correlated with
arousal, within SD, however, potency did not correlate highly with the other two dimensions. With
the SD we introduce an efficient verbal instrument for measuring emotion dimensions, which is
capturing the dimension of potency and is thus complementary to the SAM.

194

Contributions

The Completion of Missing Information During Coherent Events Is
Caused by Backward Inferences Rather Than Predictive Perception
Frank Papenmeier1, Alisa Brockhoff1 & Markus Huff2

University of Tübingen, Department of Psychology; 2German Institute for Adult Education, Department of Research
Infrastructures
frank.papenmeier@uni-tuebingen.de

1

Event completion describes the finding that humans sometimes falsely remember that they have seen
information that was actually missing within a causally coherent event. It is yet unknown whether
event completion is caused by predictive perception or backward inferences. We studied the
underlying process with two experiments involving short soccer video clips. We removed a critical
moment of ball release in half of the clips. This release moment was followed either by a causal
continuation (e.g., ball flying) or a non-causal continuation (e.g., fouled player). We asked
participants to detect whether this critical release moment was present in the clip or not. As
expected, we observed a completion effect, that is an increased false alarm rate (erroneous reports
of having seen the missing information) occurred in the causal condition as compared with the noncausal condition. Completion occurred even when participants responded immediately after the
critical release moment (Experiment 1). However, the presentation of a white mask instead of the
causal continuation did not result in event completion (Experiment 2), demonstrating the role of
backward inferences. We conclude that observers complete missing information during coherent
events based on fast backward inferences rather than predictive perception.

Beanspruchungswirkung von Interaktionskonzepten für
Nebenaufgaben während der Fahrt
Nikolai Pärsch1, Arnd Engeln2 & Martin Baumann3

Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, HMI Anzeige und Bedienung; 2Stuttgart Media University, Market- & Advertising
Research, Traffic & Transport Psychology; 3Ulm University, Human Factors
nikolai.paersch@porsche.de

1

In vorangehenden Studien (z.B. Strayer et al. (2017)) wurden die visuelle und kognitive
Beanspruchung von Infotainmentsystemen untersucht. Neben dem Vergleich von Systemen, standen
hier auch Interaktionsmodalitäten und verschiedene Aufgabentypen im Fokus. Doch wie wirkt sich
die konkrete Gestaltung einer Aufgabe auf die Beanspruchungswirkung aus? So kann die Gestaltung
einer Funktionsauswahl z.B. über eine hierarchische Auswahl über mehrere Ebenen oder durch eine
Freitextsuche gelöst werden – bei der Freitextsuche kann u.a. in manuelle Eingabe, Eingabe über
Gestik oder Eingabe über Sprache unterschieden werden. Wie entwickelt sich hierbei die
Beanspruchungswirkung? Im Rahmen eines Fahrsimulatorexperiments wird eine typische
Funktionsauswahl in einem Infotainmentsystem in den vier angesprochenen Varianten während der
Fahrt evaluiert. Als Kontrollbedingung bearbeiten die Probanden eine auditive N-Back-Aufgabe in
drei Stufen (0,1, 2) (Mehler, Reimer & Dusek (2011)). Die Beanspruchung wird über physiologische,
subjektive und leistungsbasierte Maße aufgezeichnet. In der Diskussion wird ein direkter Vergleich
der Aufgaben vorgestellt, zudem werden die Messwerte mit den Werten des N-Back-Tasks in
Relation gesetzt.

195

Contributions

It’s the Other Way Around! Early Modulation of Sensory Distractor
Processing Induced by Late Response Conflict
Bernhard Pastötter & Christian Frings
University of Trier, Psychology Department
pastoetter@uni-trier.de

Understanding the neural processes that maintain goal-directed behavior is a major challenge for the
study of attentional control. While much of the previous work on the issue has focused on prefrontal
brain areas, little is known about the contribution of sensory processes to the regulation of attentional
control. An EEG study is reported that examined brain oscillatory activities invoked in the processing
of response conflict in a lateralized single flanker Eriksen task, in which single distractor letters were
presented either left or right to the targets. Distractors were response compatible, response
incompatible, or neutral in relation to the responses associated with the targets. Behavioral results
showed that responses in incompatible trials were slower and more error prone than responses in
compatible and neutral trials. Electrophysiological results revealed an early sensory lateralization
effect in evoked theta power, which was more pronounced in incompatible than compatible and
neutral trials. The sensory lateralization effect preceded in time a prominent midfrontal conflict effect
in induced theta power. The findings indicate a rapid modulation of sensory distractor processing
induced by late response conflict. Theoretical implications of the findings, in particular with respect
to theories relating to stimulus-response binding, are discussed.

Visual Perception of the Properties of Deformable Objects
Vivian C. Paulun, Filipp Schmidt & Roland W. Fleming
University of Giessen, Department of Psychology
Vivian.C.Paulun@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Visually estimating the stiffness and elasticity of deformable objects is complex. We aimed to
investigate how the human visual system solves this task. We simulated and rendered 20 short
animations in which rigid objects interact with a non-rigid target object. We varied the type of
interaction as well as the stiffness (or compliance) and elasticity of the target, i.e. whether the
deformation was permanent (plastic) or the object returned to its original shape (elastic). Fifteen
observers rated the apparent softness, elasticity and deformation of the targets. Observers' estimates
were in accordance with the simulated internal properties, but plastic objects were perceived softer
than equally stiff elastic objects. Presumably this is because plastic deformations were perceived
larger than elastic deformations. In general, there was a strong correspondence between perceived
stiffness and perceived deformation. We found that perceptual estimates were well predicted by a
model based on seven deformation features (e.g. wobbling, stretching, curving) that we measured in
the 3D-meshes underlying our stimuli (r = .93). Our work suggests that the visual system might use
simple mid-level features of the observed deformation in order to estimate the internal properties of
non-rigid objects.

196

Contributions

Prediction of Indirect Action Consequences
Mareike Pazen, Tilo Kircher & Benjamin Straube

Philipps-University Marburg, Department for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy
mareike.pazen@staff.uni-marburg.de

The ability to attribute the sensory consequences of voluntary actions to oneself is based on internal
prediction models. The use of tools poses a challenge to these predictive mechanisms, as both direct
(body) and indirect (tool) action consequences need to be classified as self-produced. During fMRI
data acquisition, participants grabbed a handle with their hand or with a tool. The handle was
either moved by participants themselves (voluntary movement) or by a custom-made device
(involuntary movement). A video of the movement was fed back to a screen in real time or with
varying delays (0-417ms). Participants reported the detection of such delays. For both non-tool and
tool use actions, preliminary results show a suppression effect i. e., worse behavioral delay detection
performances as well as lower blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) responses in primary sensory
cortices for voluntary compared to involuntary movements. These findings suggest that 1) the
perception of indirect action consequences resulting from tool use movements is similar to when
actions are executed with the hand, 2) they both rely on similar predictive mechanisms, and 3) that
tools can serve as an elongation of the self.

Base Rate Task: Not a Measure of Logical Processing
Danielle Pessach & Karl Christoph Klauer

Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Psychologisches Institut
danielle.pessach@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

BACKGROUND: Dual process theories state that there a two processes involved in reasoning,
typically called “Type-1” and “Type-2”. A widely used task to assess those two processes is the Base
Rate task: participants receive information about the frequency of two groups and then need to judge
to which of those a described individual belongs to. Responses in incongruent trials (i.e., description
incongruent with base rate) that are based on the description are assumed to reflect heuristic Type-1
processing, whereas responses based on the base rate reflect Type-2 processing. METHODS: We
applied the Process-Dissociation-Procedure (PDP) to reanalyse four experiments, in which Bago &
DeNeys (2017) use the Base Rate task together with manipulations suppressing Type-2 processing.
The PDP allows to separate the processes, rather than just equating processes with tasks. RESULTS:
We show that the process based on the base rate is not inhibited by the manipulations, but is
enabled. That is, when Type-2 process is inhibited, the values for the base rate parameter increase,
whereas the parameter based on the description decreases. CONCLUSION: Basing a response on
the base rate is arguably the logical response, but that does not reflect logical Type-2 processing.

197

Contributions

Rhythmic modulation of object-based attention in working memory
Benjamin Peters1, Benjamin Rahm2, Jochen Kaiser1 & Christoph Bledowski1

Institute of Medical Psychology, Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main; 2Medical Psychology and Medical
Sociology, Albert Ludwigs University of Freiburg
peters@med.uni-frankfurt.de
1

Attention allows us to prioritize relevant information based on spatial locations, features, or objects.
Recently, it has been shown that attention is not sustained but rather fluctuates periodically across
time. In particular, the interplay between space- and object-based selection leads to rhythmic
patterns in detection rates that differ within and between objects. Working memory (WM) is
hypothesized to utilize the same attentional mechanisms as perception. In support of this view, we
have demonstrated that the principles of object-based attention in perception also apply to WM:
Participants shifted their attention between memorized positions faster within the same object than
across different objects. We replicated these findings in the present study. Moreover, manipulating
the cue-probe interval in 33-ms steps from 100 to 900 ms during WM retention revealed that this
same-object benefit was periodically modulated across time, corresponding to a rate of
approximately 6-7Hz. These results suggest that the allocation of attention in WM shows a rhythmic
modulation, thus emphasizing the hypothesized correspondence between attentional mechanisms in
perception and WM.

The Power of Non-Action: Forming stimulus-response associations via
instruction, observation, and imagery
Christina Pfeuffer, Karolina Moutsopoulou, Florian Waszak & Andrea Kiesel
University of Freiburg, Cognition, Action, and Sustainability Unit
christina.pfeuffer@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

It has long been suggested that stimulus-response (S-R) associations, the basis of behavioral
automaticity, could only be formed by actively responding to a stimulus. Yet, recent research
demonstrated that merely instructing S-R mappings in the absence of own action was sufficient to
establish two components of S-R associations, stimulus-action (S-A) and stimulus-classification (S-C)
associations, that affected subsequent behavior. Here, we used an item-specific priming paradigm to
assess whether observing an action and mentally imagining an action similarly lead to the formation
of S-A and S-C associations. In probe trials, participants classified everyday objects either according
to their size or mechanicity by pressing a left or right key. In the preceeding item-specific prime trials,
participants either actively classified objects by pressing a key, were instructed regarding S-A and SC mappings, imagined themselves performing an object classification, or observed a computer hand
performing the object classification. Better probe performance for item-specific repetitions in S-C
mapping rather than switches suggested that, in all conditions, participants had acquired S-C
associations. However, S-A associations were apparently only formed by active task execution and
instruction.

198

Contributions

Eyes into the future: Temporal shifts of oculomotor action perception
during concurrent execution of manual actions
Aleks Pieczykolan & Lynn Huestegge

University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology
aleks.pieczykolan@gmail.com

While bimanual coordination is a widely studied issue in action control, much less is known about
temporal coordination of cross-modal actions. From research on reaching for objects, it is well
known that the eyes precede manual actions by landing earlier on an object in order to improve
manual movement efficiency and accuracy. However, little is known about how humans temporally
coordinate eye and hand movements in the absence of a common target object. Specifically, how
do they represent simultaneity across the oculomotor and manual effector domains? In the present
study, participants were instructed to execute two actions as simultaneously as possible (i.e., to
group two responses) within (manual-manual) and across (manual-oculomotor) effector systems.
Additionally, participants gave confidence ratings regarding their perceived success in simultaneous
execution. While participants were generally able to execute two manual actions at the same time,
simultaneously perceived cross-modal actions were executed asynchronously: Oculomotor actions
(i.e., saccades to a designated target) predated manual actions, which suggests that participants’
oculomotor action perception was shifted towards the future. The present results will be discussed
with respect to input-related (perceptual) oculomotor temporal predating effects, while generally
pointing towards different temporal reference frames for the manual and oculomotor effector
domain.

Mental Rotation and Handedness: Differences in object-based and
egocentric Transformations
Stefanie Pietsch & Petra Jansen

Universität Regensburg, Institut für Sportwissenschaft
stefanie.pietsch@ur.de

This study investigates mental rotation performance of right- and left-handers in object-based and
egocentric mental rotation tasks using body stimuli with an outstretched hand in front and back view.
Generally right-handers show slightly better mental rotation performance than left-handers, but rightand left-handers show different hemispheric preferences and strategies during solving spatial tasks.
Additionally, different processing strategies are supposed for object-based and egocentric mental
rotation tasks (same-different versus left-right judgments). The results showed different reaction time
increase with growing angular disparity for object-based, F(7,280) = 73.86, p < .001, ?p2 = .65,
and egocentric transformations, F(7,280) = 38.87, p < .001, ?p2 = .49. Stimuli in the front view
required longer reaction times than the ones in the back view, F(1,40) = 12.91, p = .001, ?p2 =
.24. We found an advantage of right-handers in front view object-based transformation but no
differences in egocentric transformations. Due to a more holistic processing strategy left-handers
showed significantly longer reaction times in front view object-based tasks, t(13) = 2.82, p < .05.
This difference disappeared in egocentric tasks due to the modification of one´s own perspective to
solve the task.

199

Contributions

Evaluative conditioning as a tool to study the interplay between
perception and emotion
Ferdinand Pittino & Anke Huckauf

Ulm University, Department for General Psychologie
ferdinand.pittino@uni-ulm.de

Emotional stimuli are prioritized in processing compared to neutral ones. In order to investigate early
sensory processing of emotional stimuli, evaluative conditioning (EC) was used in order to assure for
identical sensory features in neutral and emotional stimuli. EC is commonly defined as the change in
liking of a conditioned stimulus (CS) by pairing it with affective unconditioned stimuli (UCS). In two
series of experiments, we examined the applicability of EC as a tool to study the effects of emotion
on perception. In the first series, compared to the CSneutral, the CSnegative was rated to be more
negative and arousing, elicited larger pupils, and was temporally overestimated. In the second
series, crowding effects were examined. CSnegative targets were easier to identify and CSnegative
flankers were more distracting than CSneutral ones. In sum, the studies strongly suggest affective
processing of the CS and facilitated processing of emotional stimuli. Hence, the studies demonstrate
that EC can be regarded as a useful tool to study the interplay between early sensory processing and
emotion.

Unfallerhebung mittels der Causal Analysis and Reconstruction of
Motor Vehicle Accidents (CarMa)
Christopher Pohr

University of Göttingen, Cognition and Decision Making
cpohr@uni-goettingen.de

Um ein besseres Verständnis der psychischen Einflussfaktoren auf Verkehrsunfälle zu erlangen,
wurde die Causal Analysis and Reconstruction of Motor Vehicle Accidents (CarMa) entwickelt. Das
Ziel von CarMa ist es, anhand der detaillierten Analyse individueller Unfälle, die an einem Unfall
beteiligten Faktoren und ihren Einfluss auf die Entstehung des Unfalls zu bestimmen sowie die
kognitiven Prozesse und gemachte Fehler zu identifizieren. CarMa kombiniert eine strukturelle
Unfallanalyse mit einer an kognitiven Prozessen orientierten sequentiellen Analyse des
Unfallverlaufes. Die Strukturanalyse bezieht die Faktoren aus DREAM 3.0 (Wallén Warner et al.
2008) sowie weitere in der Literatur gefundene Faktoren mit ein. Die Analyse der kognitiven
Prozesse, die dem Unfall zu Grunde liegen, baut auf der Cognitive Work Analysis, genauer der
Control Task Analysis (Vicente, 1999), auf. Mit dieser Analyse können kognitive Fehler identifiziert
werden, die die Entstehung eines Unfalls begünstigt haben. CarMa wird derzeit in einer Studie zu
Auffahrunfällen erprobt, bei der Unfallfahrer systematisch zu unfallbegünstigenden Faktoren und zur
Unfallfahrt interviewt werden. Bei der Studie kooperierten wir mit der Medizinischen Hochschule
Hannover, dem Polizeipräsidium Nordhessen in Kassel und der Polizeidirektion Göttingen. Erste
Ergebnisse zu CarMa werden anhand analysierter Unfälle präsentiert.

200

Contributions

Effector priming during action observation in combat sports
Andrea Polzien, Iris Güldenpenning & Matthias Weigelt
University of Paderborn, Psychology and Movement Science
andrea.polzien@upb.de

According to simulation theory, observers simulate actions performed by other humans as if they
would execute the action themselves (Jeannerod, 2001). In three experiments we tested, if
participants’ reaction to color targets is influenced by the presence of static images showing a
combat sports athlete performing kicks and punches. Participants were asked to react to blue and
red targets by either pressing a hand or a foot button. In Experiment 1, the blue and red target
frames surrounded the whole pictures, in Experiment 2, circles surrounded the active effector, and in
Experiment 3, circles surrounded the passive effector. Results showed no incidental priming effects,
when participants reacted to the color of the stimulus frame (Exp. 1), selective priming effects, when
the focus of attention was directed to the active effector (Exp. 2), and priming effects of the same
size, when the focus of attention was directed to the passive effector. First, this points to the role of
directing attention for the co-activation of effectors during action observation in combat sports.
Second, it indicates a co-activation of effectors, which is due to a matching process, rather than
action simulation.

Contextual flexibility of the representation of action- and soundrelated verbs in the motor and auditory systems: An fMRI study
Margot Popp

Ulm University, Department of Psychiatry
margot.popp@uni-ulm.de

Modality-specific theories assume a close link between conceptual knowledge and sensorimotor
brain systems. Stable conceptual representations were implicitly supposed for a long time because
concepts have been thought to be contextually invariant. Recent views, however, assume a
situational recruitment of somatosensory brain regions during conceptual processing. The present
fMRI-study investigated the influence of context words on conceptual processing of action- or soundrelated verbs. Subjects first performed a context decision task, in which action and sound verbs were
presented with a context noun. These verbs were then presented in a subsequent lexical decision
task, in which these verbs from the context phase were presented together with new action- or soundrelated verbs. Thereafter, acoustic and motor localizer tasks were administered in order to identify
brain regions involved in sound and action processing. In the lexical decision task, we found a
general context effect in frontal brain areas and differential activation patterns for action- and soundrelated verbs depending on contextual pre-activation. These activations partially overlapped with
brain regions that were activated by real movements or real sounds, respectively. Differential contextdependent processing of feature-specific word meaning in the respective sensorimotor areas
indicates a flexible recruitment of modality-specific conceptual feature information.

201

Contributions

Presenting visual stimuli in ultra-high temporal resolution with
gaming monitors
Christian H. Poth1, Rebecca M. Foerster1, Christian Behler1, Ulrich Schwanecke2, Werner X.
Schneider1 & Mario Botsch1
Bielefeld University; 2Rhein-Main University of Applied Sciences
c.poth@uni-bielefeld.de

1

We present a new method that for the first time allows to present visual stimuli with ultra-high
temporal resolution (< 1 ms) on commercially available gaming monitors (with G-Sync). We
implemented the method in three different programming languages (C++, Python, and Matlab). For
all three implementations, we verified the temporal resolution and precision of visual presentation by
means of external measurements. In addition, we demonstrate the application of the method in a
psychophysical experiment, showing that object recognition performance improves with fine
increases of presentation duration.

Regressive Shrinkage of Primacy Effects in Self-Determined Impression
Formation from Samples
Johannes Prager & Klaus Fiedler

Universität Heidelberg
johannes.prager@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

Impression formation from incomplete sets of information is a major task of everyday decision
making. Examining impression formation by presenting traits for judging virtual persons goes back to
Asch (1946). In a recent study (Prager, Krueger & Fiedler, 2017) extending this approach to highly
controlled stimulus input, we confirmed that participants rely on primacy effects caused by ecological
sampling. Small information samples are much more likely to show extreme and non-ambivalent
information. If that is the case, participants are likely to truncate information search. Thus, if
participants can truncate sampling themselves, small samples tend to be judged more extreme than
larger ones. However, cognitive processing of the ecologically defined input also determines
truncation of information search. We assume these processes to depend on context and person (i.e.
decision maker). In this study we showed that the primacy effect of judgments (more pronounced
judgments for small samples) regresses when time (as an element of context) was changed (that is
participants re-evaluated samples they drew themselves earlier) and even more when time and
person were changed (other participants re-evaluated the samples the first participants chose).

202

Contributions

Distinguishing Gloss from Textured Matte Materials
Konrad Eugen Prokott1, Hideki Tamura2 & Roland W. Fleming1

Justus-Liebig-Universität, Fachbereich 06 Psychologie und Sportwissenschaften; 2Toyohashi University of Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
eugenprokott@hotmail.com

1

Humans easily distinguish matte from glossy surfaces, but the underlying visual computations remain
poorly understood. We took a data-driven approach to identifying gloss cues, by learning from large
numbers of images. We created 75,000 scenes with varying objects, light-probes and viewpoints,
each rendered once with a high gloss (mirror-like) material and once with a low gloss (near-matte)
textured material. 10 participants classified 300 such images as glossy or matte, achieving 79-93%
correct. We trained several classifiers to distinguish the two materials: linear classifiers trained on
simple intensity and colour statistics and Portilla-Simoncelli texture statistics, as well as convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) with different depths. Using participants' responses we selected a test set
spanning from consistently correctly to consistently incorrectly judged images. We used Bayesian
hyperparameter search to identify CNN architectures that correlated highest with humans on this test
set. We trained Generative Adversarial Networks of varying depths to create images of the two
material categories. Testing these images on human observers, we arrived at a sufficient network
depth to imitate those features that humans use to distinguish high gloss from low gloss textured
materials. These networks have striking similarities to the CNNs that could predict human judgments.

Agentive coercion in German copula sentences makes you look twice:
Evidence from an eye-tracking study
Anna Pryslopska

University of Tübingen, SFB 833
anna.pryslopska@uni-tuebingen.de

An eyetracking during reading study investigated whether the agentive interpretation of German
copula predicate constructions involves a semantic reintepretation of the copula. The study, preceded
by corpus and acceptability rating experiments, had a 2x2 design with factors: verb (copula "war",
behave "sich verhalten"), conjunction (agentive "um", stative "weil"). "Sich verhalten" was a control
condition to correct for the conjunctions' word length difference. 40 participants were tested in 4 lists
with 60 items/246 fillers (| indicate invisible IAs): Sophie | war/verhielt sich | freundlich, | und
zwar | *um* | die Eltern | stolz auf sie zu machen. Sophie was/behaved friendly, namely in order
to make the parents proud of her Sophie | war/verhielt sich | freundlich, | und zwar | *weil* | die
Eltern | sie gut erzogen haben. Sophie was/behaved friendly, namely because the parents raised
her well. The results confirm that the agentive interpretation of the copula requires coercion:
copula+"um" was more difficult than copula+"weil". This was visible in first fixation duration
(ß=0,SE=0,t=3.8,p<0.001), first pass RT (ß=0,SE=0,t=3.4,p<0.001) and regression path duration
(ß=0.4,SE=0.1,t=4,p<0.001) on the conjunction IA. A follow-up study is underway which
investigates whether this effect is visible if the adjective is modified by "so". "So" intensifies the
adjective, possibly facilitating the agentive interpretation.

203

Contributions

The other end of the line: Motivational direction cannot be measured
by spatial biases in line bisection
Giulia Pugnaghi1, Carina Kreitz1, Daniel Memmert1 & Robert Schnürch2

German Sport University Cologne, Institute of Training and Computer Science in Sport; 2University of Bonn,
Department of Psychology
giuliapugnaghi@gmail.com
1

Previous research indicates that the two hemispheres of the brain are differently involved in the
processing of motivational direction. Approach motivation, induced by positive emotions, is reflected
in greater activation in the left hemisphere, whereas avoidance motivation, induced by negative
emotions, more strongly activates the right hemisphere. A simple behavioural measure of relative
hemispheric activation is the visuospatial bias in the line bisection task. In three experiments we
investigated whether the line bisection task can be used to measure approach and avoidance
motivation. Negative and positive affect was induced via happy or sad music (Experiment 1, N =
50), happy or terrifying pictures (Experiment 2, N = 70), and happy or frightening videos
(Experiment 3, N = 90). While participants’ mood was successfully manipulated and power in each
experiment was extraordinarily high (> .99), there was no significant effect of mood on response
asymmetry scores on the line bisection task (all F's < 1.58, p's > .212). Additional Bayesian
analyses also provided no evidence of the hypothesized effect. Thus, visuospatial bias in line
bisection does not seem to be a sensitive measure of approach and avoidance motivation induced
by positive and negative emotions.

Killing the deadly beauty. Character aesthetics in a video game
influences the perceived burden in a moral dilemma situation
Marius Raab, Feliciana Wolff & Claus-Christian Carbon

University of Bamberg, Department for General Psychology and Methodology
marius.raab@uni-bamberg.de

Does aesthetics matter in existential questions? In an opulent video game scene, 51 participants
were asked to assume the role of a spaceship captain. The captain has to decide if a blind
passenger, a young girl, should be thrown into space. If the girl stays, the spaceship’s fuel would run
out, dooming everyone. Twenty-five participants saw a scene with a vividly rendered picture of an
attractive girl, 26 a picture of an unattractive girl (following ideas by, e.g., Zebrowitz & Montepare,
2005). Participants deciding over the attractive girl’s fate rated the task as more difficult (M = 2.96
on a 5-point Likert scale, SD = 1.24) than those confronted with the unattractive girl (M = 1.85, SD =
1.38), evaluated with an independent-samples t-test, t(49) = 3.03, p = .004, Cohen’s d = .85). The
decision outcome, however, was not related to the girl’s attractiveness. In both groups, about half of
the participants decided to throw the girl out. The decision to kill the girl immediately was associated
with more negative and less positive emotions, indicating that for some the immediate emotional cost
for killing the girl would have been higher than the long-term cost of dooming the ship.

204

Contributions

The Hard Work of Doing Nothing: Accounting for Inhibitory Costs
During Multiple Action Control
Tim Raettig & Lynn Huestegge

University of Würzburg, Institute for Psychology
tim.raettig@gmail.com

Performing many actions at the same time is usually associated with performance costs. However,
recent eye tracking evidence indicates that under specific conditions, inhibiting a secondary
response can be more costly than executing it, resulting in dual-action benefits. Here, we show that
performance gains due to inhibitory control demands are not limited to saccades as a response
modality. In our study, participants had to react to a visually presented directional word by either
reading the stimulus aloud (vocal modality), pressing the corresponding arrow key on a keyboard
(manual modality), or both. Crucially, manual error rates were significantly lower when participants
had to respond with both a button press and naming than when they had to respond with naming
only. More specifically, in naming-only conditions we observed a high percentage of false-positive
manual responses, suggesting difficulties with inhibiting an unwarranted manual action. Thus, our
results indicate that difficulties associated with single- (vs. dual-) action control are a stable, domaingeneral phenomenon which likely arises whenever executory demands are accompanied by
substantial additional inhibitory control demands.

Cognitive modelling reveals subjective visibility depends on taskrelevant and task-irrelevant features as well as detection of motor
errors
Manuel Rausch & Michael Zehetleitner

Katholische Universität Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, Psychologie II
manuel.rausch@ku.de

How do human observers determine the degree to which they are consciously seeing a stimulus, i.e.
the subjective visibility? Observers presented with backwards-masked sinusoidal gratings were asked
to report both the orientation of the grating as well as the degree of subjective visibility of the
grating. The best fit to the joint distribution of orientation responses and degrees of visibility was
obtained by the extended weighted evidence and visibility model, according to which subjective
visibility is based on 1) sensory evidence about the task-relevant feature of the stimulus, 2) the
strength of evidence about task-irrelevant features, and 3) the detection of erroneous motor
responses. The pattern of visibility in incorrect orientation decisions was inconsistent with various
alternative models, such as signal detection theory, parallel models of metacognition, postdecisional
accumulation models, high threshold theory, and weighted evidence and visibility models without
error detection. Overall, these results indicate that subjective visibility is not exclusively informed by
visual processing: Instead, metacognitive processes such as the detection of motor errors contribute
to subjective visibility as well.

205

Contributions

Causal perspectives: on carefully providing cues to improve risk
understanding
Felix G. Rebitschek

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Harding Center for Risk Literacy
rebitschek@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

Informing about risks is challenging as risk perceptions affecting behavior depend on how
associated probabilities are communicated. To facilitate understanding of those probabilities risk
cues (RCs) can be provided (e.g. perspectives). Yet, as selected RCs can distort the perception of the
target risk, this should be examined systematically. First, a RC which can be an independent cause
of the same risk outcome bears no information apart from its anchoring probability (common-effect
condition). In contrast a RC as an additional effect of the target risk informs beyond the anchor
(common-cause condition). Second, controllability of RCs can impact on perceived controllability of
the risk (non- & controllability condition). Experimental results (4x2 design) showed (N=183) that
controllability of the provided RC (without any anchor) not only adjusted risk perception but also
estimates towards the ground truth (compared to non-controllability). Moreover, in case of RCs being
effect of a common-cause model that enables causal inferences estimates and their accuracies were
not distorted by an anchoring probability (in contrast to common-effect RC). Causal relationships and
comparable controllability of a provided RC can modify risk perception. This indicates a need for
investigating guiding principles to avoid distorting perceptions when communicating with RCs, such
as perspectives.

What does money value? The effect of financial value on inattentional
blindness
Dennis Redlich1, Carina Kreitz1, Daniel Memmert1 & Robert Schnürch2

German Sport University Cologne, Institute of Training and Computer Science in Sport; 2University of Bonn,
Department of Psychology
d.redlich@dshs-koeln.de
1

Conscious perception often fails when an object appears unexpectedly and attention is focused
elsewhere, a phenomenon termed inattentional blindness. While physical salience and personal
value increase the probability that an unexpected object is detected, it is still unclear if there likewise
is an effect of monetary value on inattentional blindness. A total of 188 (M = 22 years, SD = 3
years) participants first completed a training phase in which they learned associations between
perceptual features (color) and reward values (high versus low reward). Afterwards, they performed
a static inattentional blindness task in which an unexpected object occurred. We hypothesized that
detection rates would be higher for unexpected objects that contain the color that was previously
associated with high monetary value than for objects of a color that was previously associated with
a low monetary value. However, the results did not support our hypothesis. We speculate that the
effect of monetary value is not strong enough to increase the detection rate of an unexpected object.
The approach that sustained appearance of the unexpected object would increase the effect of
monetary value, was tested through a dynamic inattentional blindness task in an additional
experiment and will be discussed.

206

Contributions

The visual representation of templates for rejection
Reshanne R Reeder1, Christian N L Olivers2 & Stefan Pollmann3

Otto-von-Guericke University, Institute of Psychology; 2Vrije Universiteit, Department of Experimental and Applied
Psychology; 3Otto-von-Guericke University, Institute of Psychology, Magdeburg; Germany Center for Behavioral
Brain Sciences
reshanne.reeder@gmail.com

1

Foreknowledge of visual distractors can speed target detection during search. One important
question concerns how this information is represented in preparation for search. Our previous study
on the topic provided evidence that the BOLD signal elicited by task-relevant non-target visual
information (“negative cue”) is suppressed in visual working memory compared to target (“positive
cue”) and even task-irrelevant (“neutral cue”) information. The current study used representational
similarity analysis to investigate the representational differences between positive and negative color
cues prior to search. We found that positive and negative cues are represented distinctly in visual
cortex, but more similarly in frontal, posterior parietal, and occipitotemporal regions compared to
neutral cues. This reveals similar attention control mechanisms, but distinct sensory representations for
positive and negative cues. Region-of-interest analyses revealed that the different cue colors that were
shown in the experiment are represented distinctly when they are positive cues, but not negative or
neutral cues, in visual cortex. These results collectively reveal differences between high-level taskrelated representations and low-level sensory representations for different cue types, providing new
evidence for templates for rejection.

“More than enough” or “now more than ever”: Destructive versus
constructive behavioural correlates of shame in the context of
individual and collective wrongdoing depend on victim versus
perpetrator status
Jonas Rees

Institute for Interdisciplinary Research on Conflict and Violence
jonas.rees@uni-bielefeld.de

Theoretically, the emotion of shame has been linked with both constructive and destructive
behavioural correlates. Individuals experiencing shame, the constructive rationale goes, wish to
apologise and make up for what happened to reduce the aversive emotion. The destructive rationale
assumes that individuals will try to avoid the shame-evoking incident, person or groups of persons
altogether. Attempts at resolving this contradiction have only been partly successful and, empirically,
results have been mixed at best. We argue that the emotion of shame can be better understood
when we account for (objective or perceived) victim versus perpetrator status. In Study 1, we show
that N = 98 students’ self-reported shame when recalling an autobiographic memory of being a
victim (perpetrator) was negatively (positively) correlated with the intention to talk about what
happened with the other person(s). In Study 2, we present data from two representative samples of
German (N = 1000) and Israeli (N = 1001) participants and show that shame in the Israeli
(German) sample was linked positively (negatively) with the willingness to draw a line under the past
and move on. Discussion focuses on the importance of understanding perpetrator and victim shame
in order for constructive reconciliation to be possible.

207

Contributions

Visuomotor binding
Alexandra Reichenbach

Hochschule Heilbronn, Fakultät für Informatik
alexandra.reichenbach@hs-heilbronn.de

The visual consequences of motor commands are quickly conveyed to the corresponding motor
control structures in the brain, which enables efficient visual feedback control of voluntary
movements. These processes work remarkably well even in the face of complex visual input or
discrepancies between physical actuator and visually perceived effect, e.g. when operating a
computer mouse. Using an ambiguous situation in which a single cursor could be controlled by either
hand, we investigate the visual and cognitive factors that determine the assignment of a visual
stimulus to the corresponding motor command. In a series of experiments we demonstrate the effects
of properties of the visual cursor, top-down influences, and the effects of additional elements in the
visual scene. Our findings provide first insights into the factors that determine the binding of visual
information to the corresponding motor structures to enable fast feedback control. In our modern
technical world, the situations in which the consequences of our actions are disconnected from their
visual consequences are on the rise. This elevates the significance of visuomotor binding from a
biological mechanism to a human factor that needs to be taken into account for designing any
technical system that requires quick and intuitive operation.

The role of feature binding demands for the interplay of visual
attention and central attention
Christina B. Reimer & Torsten Schubert

Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Department of Psychology; Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of
Psychology
christina.reimer@psych.uni-halle.de

Visual attention and central attention are limited in capacity. In conjunction search, visual attention is
required to select items and to bind item features, which results in a serial search process. In dualtasks, central attention is required to bind perceived stimulus to associated response information in
Task 1 and Task 2, respectively, which results in sequential performance. Here, we investigated
whether central attention is needed for feature binding in conjunction search. In three dual-task
experiments, participants completed an auditory two-choice discrimination Task 1 and a conjunction
search Task 2. In Experiment 1, the feature binding demands in conjunction search consisted of two
features per item, whereas they consisted of three and four features per item in Experiments 2 and 3.
When the feature binding demands were low (i.e., two features), the search time analysis based on
the locus-of-slack method revealed that visual attention operated independently of central attention.
Thus, by default, visual attention and central attention rely on distinct capacity limitations. However,
when the feature binding demands were high (i.e., three and four features), the analysis indicated
that central attention was necessary for feature binding. To conclude, feature binding demands
modulate the interplay of visual attention and central attention.

208

Contributions

Das Blickverhalten von Radfahren: Ein Vergleich zwischen Fahrten in
realer und simulierter Fahrumgebung
Klaus Reinprecht1 & Anja Katharina Huemer2

Inspectio Forschungsinstitut; 2Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institut für Psychologie, Ingenieur- und
Verkehrspsychologie
a.huemer@tu-braunschweig.de
1

Radfahrer haben im Vergleich zu motorisierten Verkehrsteilnehmern ein stark erhöhtes
Verletzungsrisiko bei Unfällen im Straßenverkehr. Sie werden in Kollisionen häufig von PKW erfasst,
die meist auch am Unfall Schuld haben. Dennoch finden sich in Beobachtungen viele Regelverstöße
von Radfahrern. Um das „normale“ Radfahrverhalten untersuchen zu können, bieten sich Naturalistic
Cylcing Studies an, die neben der Verkehrsumwelt auch das Blickverhalten der Radfahrer mit
erfassen. Eine erste Studie mit Blickerfassungssystem des Inspectio Forschungsinstituts zeigt, dass dies
möglich ist. Um das Verhalten von Radfahrern in kritischen, unfallträchtigen Situationen zu
untersuchen, wurde an der Technischen Universität Braunschweig ein Fahrradsimulator aufgebaut
und in erprobt. Auch hier wurden die Blicke der Radfahrer erfasst. Der vorliegende Beitrag vergleicht
die Blickmuster zwischen natürlichen Fahrten und simulierten Fahrten von N=40 Probanden in
Fahrradsimulator mit N=28 Probanden während natürlicher Fahrten auf geraden Straßenabschnitten
innerhalb städtischer Szenarien und gibt damit Auskünfte über die externen Validität des im
Simulator erhobenen Verhaltens.

Mobile assessment of driver mental states in a simulated driving
environment
Julian Elias Reiser

Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, Ergonomics
reiser@ifado.de

Driving a car is one of the most important mobility factors in people’s lives, though driving itself is a
complex interplay of many demanding tasks and mental activities. With increasing age, driving
related attentional processes are known to decrease, but neurophysiological consequences for
driving are still quite unclear. In this study, the effect of aging on mental driver states was examined
during an hour-long simulated driving scenario in an interconnected traffic network, consisting of
German “Autobahn”, highway, and city segments with prolonged monotonous driving periods.
While two age groups (young: 19-26, old: 63-76) with 12 participants each drove along the same
track guided by a navigation system, EEG was recorded with a mobile, bilateral, around-the-ear
setup (cEEGrids, TMSi, NL). Mental states were operationalized by normalized alpha- and thetapower (band power / whole spectrum power) as physiological correlates of attentional processes
and measured over time. Results of a mixed-linear-model showed a significant interaction effect of
time on task and age on the normalized frequency-band power. On the one hand, younger drivers’
alpha- and theta-power increased over time, indicating attentional withdrawal. On the other hand,
elderly participants’ frequency-power remained stable, hinting at compensatory mechanisms while
driving.

209

Contributions

Strategies of response organization: Converging evidence of an
individual preference in free concurrent multitasking across different
tasks, instructions, and time structures
Jessika Reissland, Jovita Brüning & Dietrich Manzey

Technische Universität Berlin, Department of Psychology and Ergonomics
jessika.reissland@tu-berlin.de

Throughout several different multitasking paradigms hints of individual preferences for response
organization strategies can be found, but systematic investigation is mostly lacking. Reissland &
Manzey (2016) proposed an approach to examine the individual response organization of two
tasks with the same priority in voluntary task-switching with preview. Three groups of participants
could clearly be distinguished: (1) blockers, working on long runs of only one task before switching
to the other, (2) switchers, switching very often between the tasks, and (3) response groupers,
grouping their responses to the two tasks together. We now present converging evidence from six
studies using different tasks (simple verbal letter/digit classifications, spatial mental rotation/pattern
matching tasks, memory tasks, and calculation tasks), different instructions (neutral or with emphasis
on parallel processing), and different time structures (similar/different baseline reaction times,
different response-stimulus intervals). Remarkably, each participant of the reported studies could
clearly be assigned to one of the three proposed strategies. This converging evidence underlines the
relevance of those strategies to describe human behavior when multitasking. However, the
distributions of the number of participants per strategy varied among the different characteristics of
the studies showing that the applied strategy does not purely depend on an individual preference.

The effect of valence, speed and rhythm of sound on distance
estimation
Martin Reuschenbach1 & Julia Bastian2

University Trier, Institute of Psychology; 2University of Trier, Institute of Psychology
bastian@leuphana.de

1

We asked what happens if car drivers hear different types of sound and have to guess distances. 90
participants in each of the three experiments were assigned to different groups of sound conditions
randomly. They had to guess the distances according to the order of a Latin square. While walking
to the experimental setting for about five minutes and guessing the distances the participants heard
sounds. In the first experiment, metal music hearer showed overestimation and piano music
underestimation. In the second experiment, four groups heard different types of piano music. The
groups with pleasant or unpleasant valence of music showed very similar degrees of underestimation
as if in situations of no music. The group with slow speed of music was significantly different from the
group with fast speed of music. In the slow speed group distances were underestimated and in the
fast speed group distances were overestimated. In the third experiment, the rhythmic slow and
arhythmic fast groups showed similar patterns as if in a no sound condition. The rhythmic fast
condition showed underestimation and the arhytmic slow condition showed overestimation.

210

Contributions

Just put it in context: How timing of prime and context information
determines unconscious context-specific conflict adaptation
Heiko Reuss & Wilfried Kunde

Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Lehrstuhl für Psychologie III
reuss@psychologie.uni-wuerzburg.de

The ability to adapt to swiftly changing contexts associated with different levels of conflict is an
astounding feat of cognitive control. This was found to be possible even when the conflict and
context information is presented unconsciously through a masked prime stimulus. However, when the
context was instead presented by the target instead of the masked prime, no conflict adaptation
occurred (Reuss et al., 2014). Here we tested the hypothesis that this is specifically due to the timing
of prime and context by varying the prime-target-SOA and presenting the context with the target. In a
masked priming paradigm, the position of the target number (above or below the preceding masked
prime) changed randomly from trial to trial and signaled either a high or a low probability of conflict
(80% vs. 20% incongruent primes). With a long SOA (120 ms), we replicated the finding that no
context-specific adaptation occurs. With a short SOA (30 ms), however, participants adapted to the
context: the congruency effect was significantly reduced in the high-conflict context compared to the
low-conflict context. Overall, this shows again that conflict adaptation is possible even with
unconscious conflicts, while further defining the strict preconditions that have to be met.

To solve several conflicts concurrently, do we need more control or
more slowing?
Alodie Rey-Mermet & Miriam Gade

Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt, General Psychology
alodie.rey-mermet@ku.de

Responding to two conflicts concurrently, such as answering a phone call while writing an email, has
been found to result in better or similar performance than responding to one conflict. To determine
whether this interaction between conflicts stems from the interplay of additional control processes
(e.g., attentional adjustment or inhibition), we conducted a study in which we combined a Stroop
task (which required identifying the color of color words) with a Flanker task (which required
identifying a central character among flankers). Participants were asked to respond to the color of a
central color word among flanking color words. To increase control requirements, we occasionally
asked half of participants to respond to the word meaning. The results revealed that the interaction
between conflicts did not stem from additional processes, but rather from a larger slowing in
performance. These findings should encourage us to be more cautious when stipulating additional
control processes.

211

Contributions

Comparing ideo-motor and socio-motor control of eye movements
Eva Riechelmann, Anne Böckler, Tim Raettig & Lynn Huestegge

University of Wuerzburg, Psychological Methods, Cognition, and Applied Research
eva.riechelmann@uni-wuerzburg.de

Socio-motor action control, an extension of ideo-motor theory to the social domain, claims that
actions in a social context are determined by anticipating responses they consistently trigger from
other people (Kunde, Weller, & Pfister, 2017). In social interaction, eye movements are of special
interest as an action domain as they can serve to affect other people’s (gaze) behavior. However,
eye movement studies so far have not addressed gaze responses of a (virtual) interaction partner as
social action effects. Two eye-tracking experiments investigated whether social information
processing in the anticipation of saccadic action effects is special, and focused on the impact of
exogenously vs. endogenously triggered saccades when acquiring action-effect associations. To
examine the occurrence of anticipation, both experiments included congruency manipulations to
prime or interfere with any anticipated representation of the subsequent effect signal. We observed
congruency effects (as an indicator of effect anticipation) for both social and non-social stimuli, but
only when effects were sufficiently salient. Results are discussed within the existing literature on the
dynamics of arbitrary (non-social) action effects and on social information processing, focusing on
the differences and similarities between social and non-social anticipation-based oculomotor control.

fNIRS evidence for interaction between types of cognitive demands in
driving
Jochem W Rieger & Anirush Unni
University of Oldenburg, Psychology
jochem.rieger@uni-oldenburg.de

Driving, like many other control tasks, imposes multiple concurrent cognitive demands. In order to
adjust ‘Adaptive Automation Systems’ to driver’s cognitive capacity utilization, we need to be able to
distinguish distinct cognitive functions at the brain level and characterize their interaction. Yet little is
known about how brain modules recruited by different concurrently occurring demands interact. We
performed a realistic driving simulator study in a VR-lab at DLR, Braunschweig with concurrent whole
head fNIRS recordings in which subjects were exposed to changing levels of lateral control (LCD,
normal highway road width) and working memory load (WML, digit-span n-back (0-back to 4-back)
speed regulation task, Unni et al. 2017). On average over subjects, we correctly predicted LCDs in
72% of the timepoints in an out-of-sample cross validation of linear models trained on the fNIRS data
separately for each WML. Mean accuracy scores significantly varied across WMLs (range 59% to
85% correct; F(4,70) = 10.2, p< .001) with better LCD predictions for intermediate WMLs. Training
linear predictors on fNIRS data across WMLs severely degraded prediction performance. These
suggest that cognitive functions involved in lateral control and working memory recruit different but
interacting brain modules.

212

Contributions

Aftereffects of imagined inhibition
Martina Rieger & Stephan F. Dahm
UMIT
martina.rieger@umit.at

In motor imagery research, usually executed actions are compared to imagined actions. However,
human action control also requires the inhibition of ongoing action. In the present study, we
investigated whether people can imagine to inhibit an ongoing action without actually inhibiting it
using the stop signal task. In this task, participants perform a visual discrimination task (go task). This
is occasionally interrupted by a stop signal (a tone; stop task) signaling participants to withhold the
ongoing response. Participants a) executed the primary and stop task, b) executed the primary task
but imagined the stop task (i.e. reactions were not actually stopped, but imagined to be stopped),
and c) executed the primary task and ignored the tones (control condition). We analysed inhibitory
after-effects, which refer to the observation that reaction times are slower in go trials following a stop
signal trial than in go trials following another go trial. We observed that inhibitory aftereffects occur
after imagined inhibition. They were smaller than after actual inhibition. However, they could not be
explained by the presentation of the tone in stop signal trials. In conclusion, imagined inhibition is
functionally similar to actual inhibition.

Disentangling effects of mental workload and visual stimulus
properties on pupil size
Fabian Ries, Elena Wolf, Philipp Olschowski, Markus Döllken & Barbara Deml
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute of Human and Industrial Engineering (ifab)
fabian.ries@kit.edu

In human-machine interaction, eye-tracking parameters such as pupil size are often being taken into
account as indicators of mental workload. However, stimulus properties can also have an impact on
these. In order to investigate the respective effects on eye-tracking parameters, we conducted an
experiment (N = 48) manipulating both mental workload and visual complexity of images
independently within a dual-task paradigm. While viewing standardized pictures of different type
(black and white drawing, colour drawing or photography) and complexity, participants thereby
had to do mental arithmetic. Results indicate that while some eye-tracking parameters such as the
number of fixations seem to be mainly influenced by mental workload manipulations, others such as
pupil size are also being strongly affected by stimulus properties such as picture type and
complexity. Results are being discussed with regard to possible implications. On the one hand,
stimulus properties should also be considered in mental workload research incorporating eyetracking. On the other hand, eye-tracking parameters can be helpful to gain further insights into the
processing of visual features such as visual complexity.

213

Contributions

Erlernbarkeit von Übernahmeaufforderungen beim
hochautomatisierten Fahren
Fabienne Roche, Stefan Brandenburg & Manfred Thüring

Technical University Berlin, Department of Psychology and Ergonomics
f.roche@tu-berlin.de

Übernahmesituationen sind ein sicherheitskritischer Bestandteil hochautomatisierten Fahrens. Fahrer
müssen sich innerhalb weniger Sekunden ein angemessenes Situationsbewusstsein aufbauen und die
Fahrzeugkontrolle übernehmen. Das vorgestellte Experiment untersuchte erstmals die folgenden zwei
Aspekte von Übernahmeaufforderungen in einem statischen Fahrsimulator: 1) Finden Lernprozesse
bei wiederholtem Erleben einer Übernahmesituation statt? 2) Hängt das Lernen von der Modalität
der Übernahmeaufforderung und der ausgeführten Nebenaufgabe ab? Insgesamt sechs Mal
absolvierten die Versuchspersonen eine visuell oder akustisch beanspruchende Nebenaufgabe und
erlebten entweder eine visuell oder akustisch präsentierte Übernahmeaufforderung. Nach jeder
Aufforderung wurden die Leistung und das Erleben der Versuchspersonen über die TTC, die
Reaktionszeit, die Lenkwinkeländerung und das Beanspruchungsempfinden erhoben. Die Ergebnisse
zeigen, dass die Versuchspersonen ihr Verhalten über die Zeit ändern; Lernen findet statt. Die
wiederholte Darbietung der Übernahmeaufforderung führte beim akustischen Signal zu
Verbesserungen im Abstandsverhalten, wohingegen es sich beim visuellen Signal über die Zeit
verschlechterte. Eine akustische Aufforderung führt zu besseren und schnelleren Reaktionen als eine
visuelle. Darüber hinaus war die Querführung des Fahrzeuges mit einer auditiven Nebenaufgabe
besser als mit einer visuellen. Die Ergebnisse legen nahe, dass die Probanden ihr Verhalten über die
Zeit verbessern, wenn die Übernahmeaufforderung und die Nebenaufgabe akustisch präsentiert
werden. Visuelle Informationsdarbietungen verschlechtern die Übernahmeleistung.

Semantic mismatches and attention shifts to the auditory modality
Jan Philipp Röer1, Raoul Bell2 & Axel Buchner2

Witten/Herdecke University; 2Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf
jan.roeer@hhu.de

1

Task-irrelevant, to-be-ignored speech disrupts visual-verbal serial recall. Recently, it was demonstrated
that distractor sentences with semantically unexpected endings are more disruptive than distractor
sentences with semantically expected endings. In the present series of experiments, we tested
whether this semantic mismatch effect is the result of attention shifts to the auditory modality.
Disruption was reduced when participants were given the opportunity to listen to the upcoming
distractor sentence before the trial during a preexposure phase. However, the semantic mismatch
effect did not habituate and it did not differ between individuals with high and low working memory
capacity. The results do not support the idea that the semantic mismatch effect is primarily due to
attentional capture.

214

Contributions

Helping hands: Fine motor skills predict basic arithmetic abilities in
preschool and first grade
Stephanie Roesch1, Ursula Fischer2, Sebastian Suggate2, Korbinian Moeller3 & Heidrun Stoeger2

Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien, Neuro-cognitive Plasticity; University of Regensburg, Department of Educational
Sciences; 2University of Regensburg, Department of Educational Sciences; 3Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien, Neurocognitive Plasticity; Institute of Psychology, Eberhard Karls University; LEAD Graduate School and Research Network,
Eberhard Karls University
s.roesch@iwm-tuebingen.de
1

Butterworth (1999) suggested that fine motor skills (FMS) and numbers are functionally related
because children use finger-based strategies (e.g., finger counting) during their numerical
development. Against this background, specific aspects of FMS (i.e., finger agility) might be more
closely related to finger-based strategies and, as a consequence, to arithmetical abilities than others
(i.e., visuomotor skills). In two studies, we investigated associations of finger agility (FA) and
visuomotor skills (VS) with arithmetic abilities cross-sectionally at preschool (Study 1) and
longitudinally (Study 2) from preschool to the end of first grade. Study 1 (N=175) revealed that FA
but not VS predicted preschoolers’ concurrent arithmetical abilities even when general cognitive
abilities (GCA) and other control variables were considered. Study 2 (N=94) expanded upon these
findings, indicating that FA but not VS measured in preschool also predicted addition performance
1.5 years later, even when controlling for variables such as preschool arithmetic abilities and GCA.
These results indicated that FA, as an aspect of FMS, was specifically associated with concurrent
arithmetic abilities but also predicted arithmetic skills longitudinally. Therefore, we conclude that
specific aspects of FMS (e.g., FA) might in fact be more closely related to finger-based strategies and
arithmetical abilities than others (e.g., VA).

The fine structure in absolute hearing threshold and in frequency
discrimination
Niels Röhrdanz & Christian Kaernbach
Institut für Psychologie, CAU Kiel
chris2018@kaernbach.de

Hearing thresholds of healthy listeners show a fine structure that is stable for an individual listener
through many years. Healthy listeners show also a small physiological amount of diplacusis, or
interaural pitch difference, with frequency ratios exceeding rarely plus or minus two percent. This
diplacusis varies with frequency, and its frequency dependency correlates with the fine structure of
the hearing threshold. It does so, however, in a complicated manner, given that the assessment of
diplacusis depends on both ears, while the fine structure of the hearing threshold is different for both
ears. In the present study we measured the fine structure of the hearing threshold and the fine
structure of the frequency discrimination. The advantage over previous studies is that we can
compare those fine structures for each ear separately. We find distinct fine structure in about half of
the tested frequency regions. They do not correlate between ears, justifying the study of frequency
discrimination performance for each ear separately.

215

Contributions

Does temporal attention aid feature-based target selection? An ERP
study
Bettina Rolke, Susanne Dietrich & Verena C. Seibold
University of Tuebingen, Department of Psychology
bettina.rolke@uni-tuebingen.de

In this study, we investigated whether temporal attention, i.e., the process of anticipating the
temporal occurrence of a stimulus, selectively aids the processing of task-relevant stimulus features.
We presented visual stimuli of different colours at specific points in time, which were announced
validly or invalidly by explicit temporal cues. Participants made a speeded choice response only to
stimuli that matched a predefined target colour and only if they occurred at the validly cued point in
time. We observed a latency reduction for perceptual event-related potentials (ERPs) evoked by
stimuli presented at the validly announced time point compared to those evoked by temporally
unexpected stimuli. Moreover, we observed an amplitude enhancement for ERPs evoked by targetcoloured stimuli compared to non-target-coloured ones. This perceptual feature-based selection of
targets, however, was not modulated by temporal attention. The selection of targets based on
temporal validity seems to happen late in the stimulus processing chain as the target-coloured stimuli
presented at the invalid time point still evoked a lateralized readiness potential (LRP) indicating
response activation. Taken together, the results show that temporal attention speeds perceptual
processing, but seems not to aid feature-based target selection at a perceptual level.

Age simulation and office work
Florian Röser, Swaantje Elsen, Ina Hendricks & Daniela Lohaus
University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt, Economic Psychology
florian.roeser@h-da.de

Does age influence the productivity in office work? How does it impact performance, emotion and
job satisfaction of workers? There are different ways to examine this: you could ask workers of old
age, but would they give truthful and unbiased answers? You could ask their colleagues or
supervisors, but will this be fair and how would they know about their job satisfaction? We used
another way: Referring to the stress-strain-model we simulated old age with the GERT®, a
GERontologic test suit. The task for the participants – half of them with the age simulation suite; the
other one just with a workman overall – was to handle simple office tasks testing their visual-,
auditory perception, mental and physical/motoric performance (e.g., recognition of text passages;
put a letter into an envelope, fill in a table at the computer). In a first experiment (N=50) we
measured the possibilities, the limits and the participants’ evaluation of the simulation suit, as well as
the effect on speed and efficiency in which the office tasks were accomplished. Further, participants’
rated their emotions and cognitions (such as perceived stress, job satisfaction and self-efficacy). We
will discuss these findings and show further ideas and experimental approaches.

216

Contributions

Neuronale Korrelate der Emotionsverarbeitung im Attentional Blink:
eine EEG-Studie
Marie-Luise Roth, Maximilian Bruchmann & Thomas Straube

University Münster, Institute of Medical Psychology and Systems Neuroscience
MarieLuise.Roth@googlemail.com

Viele Studien haben in der Vergangenheit emotionale Reize in ihrer Wahrnehmbarkeit manipuliert
um zu klären, ob Emotionsverarbeitung auch ohne Bewusstsein stattfindet. Die Widersprüchlichkeit
der Befunde kann u.a. dadurch erklärt werden, dass verschiedene experimentelle Paradigmen das
Bewusstwerden der Reize auf verschiedenen Verarbeitungsstufen unterbrechen. In der vorliegenden
Studie wurden emotionale Gesichter in einem Attentional Blink Paradigma als T2 dargeboten.
Hierbei wurde der Kontrast der Gesichter individuell so kalibriert, dass sowohl bei Lag 4 als auch
bei Lag 9 die Reize zu 50% wahrgenommen bzw. nicht wahrgenommen wurden. Entsprechend dem
klassischen Attentional Blink-Effekt, zeigte sich, dass bei Lag 4 für die kritische Performanz ein
höherer Kontrast als bei Lag 9 notwendig war. Man kann demzufolge annehmen, dass bei Lag 4 ein
Nichtwahrnehmen der Reize vornehmlich durch das Fehlen von Aufmerksamkeit bestimmt ist,
während bei Lag 9 eher die geringe Reizintensität entscheidend scheint. Somit lassen sich im
vorliegenden Paradigma Emotionseffekte von Gesichtern untersuchen, deren Wahrnehmbarkeit auf
hoher (Lag 4) und auf geringer (Lag9) Verarbeitungsstufe gestört wurde. Im ereigniskorrelierten
Potential (EKP) beobachteten wir eine Modulation des differentiellen Emotionseffektes durch den
Faktor Lag. Dies liefert einen Hinweis darauf, dass unbewusste emotionale Verarbeitung nur dann
stattfindet, wenn eine Bewusstwerdung erst auf einer höheren Verarbeitungsstufe gestört wird.

Enhanced colour perception and memory for colours in graphemecolour synaesthetes and colour experts
Nicolas Rothen & Rebecca Ovalle Fresa
University of Bern, Department of Psychology
nicolas.rothen@gmail.com

Synaesthesia is associated with extraordinary experiences elicited in the presence of an appropriate
inducing stimulus. For instance, in grapheme colour synaesthesia (GCS) an achromatic letter may
elicit a highly specific colour experience. Previous studies reported enhanced colour perception in
GCS and other studies provided empirical evidence for enhanced colour memory in GCS. This led to
the suggestion that enhanced perceptual processing in synaesthesia may be responsible for
enhanced memory performance. However, perceptual processing and memory performance has
never been directly compared in a single study. Thus, it was our primary goal to compare perceptual
processing and memory performance in a group of GCS, non-synaesthetic colour experts (NCE) and
non-synaesthetic controls (NSC). GCS and NCE outperformed NSC in both, perceptual processing
and memory tasks, while GCS and NCE showed similar performance in both tasks. We conclude
that enhanced memory performance in GCS and NCE is associated with enhanced perceptual
processing.

217

Contributions

Spatial referencing across languages
Annelie Rothe-Wulf1, Sieghard Beller2 & Andrea Bender2

University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology; 2University of Bergen, Department of Psychosocial science
annelie.rothe@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

1

As one of the core domains of cognitive psychology, spatial cognition triggered a variety of research
questions, such as how spatial information is represented, memorized, used for navigation, or how it
is communicated among individuals. In the interplay of these diverse research fields, discussions
arose about the causal role that language might play in spatial cognition. Most prominently,
conceptualizations of spatial frames of reference (FoR) had been used to contrast the effects that
linguistic preferences of either viewer-centered (relative) FoRs or field-oriented (absolute) FoRs might
have on spatial cognitive processes. However, what had been neglected so far, were preferences for
and implications of different subtypes of relative referencing strategies within and across speech
communities. Implementing diverse tasks and paradigms in several languages, we scrutinized
preferences for specific relative referencing strategies and their indications for other domains, such
as temporal reasoning or evaluative judgements. The results hint at cross-linguistic differences in (a)
the preferred relative referencing strategies, and (b) the interindividual variability of FoR preferences
within speech communities. For all languages, the preferred spatial referencing strategies showed no
or only weak correspondence with the temporal domain, but they had effects on evaluative
judgements.

Infants' Mental Rotation and Recognition of 3D Objects – the Relevance
of Stereovision
Martina Röthlisberger & Andrea Frick

University of Fribourg, Department of Psychology
martina.roethlisberger@unifr.ch

In this longitudinal study, we investigated the relation between emerging stereovision and infants’
recognition and mental rotation of three-dimensional (3D) objects. Infants (N=32) were tested at 4
and 7 months of age. Stereovision was assessed using the Lang-Stereo-Test® in a preferential-looking
paradigm. Object recognition and rotation were tested in a violation-of-expectation paradigm. An
object rotated 180° in the picture plane, was occluded by a blackout, and reappeared either in the
original or a mirrored version in three different orientations: the final rotation position (baseline),
rotated 60° further in the same plane (extrapolated), or rotated 60° in an orthogonal plane. An
analysis of the time infants looked at the objects after reappearance showed that at 4 months, infants
with stereovision, and mainly girls, looked longer at the mirrored than the original objects, indicating
that they were able to mentally rotate the objects and recognize them in a 3D environment. At 7
months, infants differentiated mirrored and original objects regardless of orientation and sex,
suggesting robust object recognition and mental rotation. The findings indicate that mental rotation
emerges between 4 and 7 months and is qualified by developing stereovision.

218

Contributions

Implicit sequence learning despite multitasking: the role of (flexible)
separation of task representations
Eva Röttger1, Hilde Haider1, Fang Zhao2 & Robert Gaschler2

University of Cologne, Department of Psychology; 2FernUniversität in Hagen, Department of Psychology
eva.roettger@uni-koeln.de
1

Recently, Röttger, Haider, Zhao and Gaschler (2017) found dual-task implicit sequence learning
despite unpredictable co-occurring events (SOA = 0 ms) only when 70% single-task trials were
intermixed into the dual-task. Here, the cognitive system might have become biased to predict
upcoming events within the sequence learning task – rather than across the tasks – thereby enabling
the reduction of the prediction error and, thus, learning. Schumacher and Schwarb (2009) have
already shown that temporal separation (SOA > 0 ms) of two – randomly paired – tasks (a sequence
learning- and a tone discrimination task) also enables learning. A time gap between two tasks may
cause separate task representations – thereby, again, fostering beneficial within-task predictions. In
the present experiment we compared three conditions, SOAlong, SOAzero and SOAmixed, to
investigate whether the cognitive system can flexibly switch to a processing mode that implements
separate task representations – given that the SOA-length is predictable. Therefore, in the SOAmixed
condition, two of four positions in a sequence learning dual-task predicted a long SOA with a
probability of 75%. If the separation of representations can indeed be implemented flexibly, we
should find learning not only in the SOAlong – but also in the SOAmixed condition.

Is negation used to predict upcoming referents in a visual world
paradigm?
Franziska Rück1, Hartmut Leuthold2, Carolin Dudschig1 & Barbara Kaup1

University Tübingen, Language & Cognition; 2University Tübingen, Biological Psychology
franziska.rueck@uni-tuebingen.de

1

One typical use of negation is to refer to exceptions. With respect to a visual display showing
several similar items and one exception, referring to the exception by means of a negation should
therefore be pragmatically felicitous. We investigated whether comprehenders use pragmatic
reasoning to predict upcoming objects in negative sentences. In Experiment 1, participants read
affirmative and negative sentences referring either to the exception or to the other objects in strongly
biased displays. Additionally, unbiased displays were implemented showing equal numbers of
objects of each type. Identification times of the correct referent were shorter with the biased display
independent of sentence polarity. Thus, participants did not predict upcoming objects based on
pragmatic reasoning specific to the use of negation. Critically, in the biased displays, the
exceptional object was highly salient which might have initially drawn the participant’s attention to
this object, resulting in a general speed-up. In Experiment 2, we therefore used a biased display with
reduced saliency of the exceptional object. The effect of display disappeared; however, again
negation did not result in a specific speed-up due to pragmatically correct negation use. Thus,
negation does not seem to facilitate the identification of an exceptional object.

219

Contributions

Negotiations by proxy are influenced by the client’s identity
Janna Katrin Ruessmann & Sascha Topolinski

University of Cologne, Social Cognition Center Cologne
jannakatrin@googlemail.com

Many professions require conducting negotiations on behalf of another individual, i.e., a client. For
instance, individuals consulting a lawyer, or appointing a financial advisor, expect those
professionals to negotiate in their best interests, and to precisely know which decisions needs to be
taken on their behalves – and which not. This expectation prompts the following question: does the
identity of a client influence the professionals in their efforts to decide in their client’s best interest?
The present research investigates this question employing a within-subjects manipulation of social
distance. Participants are instructed to decide about unfair and hyper-fair offers in an ultimatum
game directed at either themselves or a client. In a pilot experiment (N=68) this client was either a
friend of the participant or a stranger. Experiment 1 (N=167) was a pre-registered replication of the
pilot. In Experiment 2 (N=90) two additional layers of client identity were realized, namely a family
member and an acquaintance. Across these experiments the following replicable pattern surfaced:
there was no impact of client identity on the acceptance rates for unfair offers. In contrast,
participants systematically accepted more hyper-fair offers for themselves and close others than for
socially distant clients.

Identity-specific coding of newly instructed task rules in the human
brain
Hannes Ruge

Technische Universität Dresden
hannes.ruge@tu-dresden.de

Learning novel tasks proceeds most efficiently when the appropriate rules are specified prospectively
via explicit instructions rather than retrospectively via feedback as in trial-and-error learning. It has
remained unclear how such newly instructed rules are initially represented in the brain and how
these neural representations might change across the first few implementation trials during an early
stage of short-term task automatization. The rationale of the present study was to track the sensitivity
of multi-voxel activation patterns for instructed individual rule identities (for instance, a left index
finger response upon stimulus A compared to the same response upon another stimulus B). This
stimulus-response (S-R) learning condition was compared to another condition that was identical
except that S-R learning was prevented and subjects were required to perform a one-back task on
identical stimulus sequences. This enabled us to identify brain regions that exclusively represented
newly instructed S-R rules, one-back rules, or both. We found evidence for all three types of rule
representations in distinct frontal cortex brain regions. These representations were detectable already
directly after instruction and further throughout practice. Interestingly, however, early and late
practice phase rule representations were highly dissimilar suggesting profound representational
transformation processes.

220

Contributions

Context-dependent attentional decoupling and its relation to
prospective memory
Jan Rummel

Heidelberg University
jan.rummel@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

Prospective memory (PM) refers to the ability to remember executing an intention in the future. It has
been argued that attentional decoupling, which comes at a cost to currently ongoing tasks, may be
adaptive for PM (Cohen, 2013; Rummel, Smeekens, & Kane, 2017). That is, PM-related thoughts
occurring during an ongoing task may help to keep the intention active. However, to be truly
adaptive, PM-thoughts should primarily occur in situations where intention-fulfillment opportunities are
likely. To test this idea, in two experiments, participants formed the intention to respond to animal
names (PM cues) with a special response while performing a lexical-decision task. In Experiment 1,
the intention was suspended during a first task phase during which participants were sometimes
probed on their thoughts. Few PM-thoughts were reported unless PM cues occurred in this phase. In
Experiment 2, the font color of the lexical-decision-task items was varied block-wise and half of the
participants were informed that the PM cues would always have one specific color. Thought reports
showed that participants who knew about the intention–font-color association experienced fewer PMthoughts during blocks with the intention-unrelated color. Results are discussed with regard to which
adaptive strategies people can use to remember intentions.

Are You Sure You Want to Delete This? The Costs of Losing the
Possibility of Memory Offloading for Subsequent Memory
Performance
Yannick Runge, Christian Frings & Tobias Tempel
University of Trier, Department of Cognitive Psychology
runge@uni-trier.de

The storing of memory content on digital devices can have beneficial effects for subsequent memory
performance as Storm and Stone (2015) recently reported. They found enhanced recall for items
encoded subsequently to a saving cue that instructed participants to save before learned items into a
computer file. The present study replicated and extended this effect in a first experiment. The
beneficial effect of memory offloading due to saving could be shown. In addition a comparable
benefit occurred when participants kept already saved encoded material, compared to trials that
required participants to delete it. We assume that the deletion of formerly stored information
produces proactive interference. Intentionally keeping files in no-deletion trials reduces this
interference, in an equivalent manner as benefits of directed forgetting. In a second experiment we
specified whether the beneficial effect of offloading is exclusively found due to a reduction of
proactive interference or can also be found in an experimental design examining retroactive
interference. No such effects were found, suggesting that saving-enhanced memory might be
restricted to a reduction of proactive interference, again equivalent to benefits of directed forgetting.
These results support the benefits of memory offloading and specify the underlying mechanisms.

221

Contributions

Consistent irrelevant response effects enhance implicit sequence
learning
Jascha Rüsseler1 & Daniel Wiswede2

Department of Psychology, Otto-Friedrich-University Bamberg; 2Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck
Jascha.Ruesseler@uni-bamberg.de
1

The present study investigates how irrelevant response effects influence implicit sequence learning.
Participants performed a modified version of the serial reaction time task (SRTT). In this task, one of
four keys corresponding to four letters on a computer screen has to be pressed. Unknown to
participants, in some parts of the blocks the stimuli appeared in a deterministic sequence, whereas in
the remainder of the blocks the stimuli were presented randomly. After each key-press, a taskirrelevant short tone was presented. Four groups with different response-key to response-effect
mapping were created (no tone presented; random tone, i.e. each response-key was associated with
four different tones; one-to-two-mapping, i.e. each response-key was associated with two different
tones; one-to-one-mapping, i.e. each response-key was associated with one tone). Explicit knowledge
of the sequence was assessed with a free-recall and a sequence generation procedure. Implicit
learning was enhanced for the two-to-one and for the one-to-one mapping groups. Furthermore, the
presence of irrelevant response-effects fostered the development of explicit sequence knowledge.
These results are discussed within a dual-process model of explicit and implicit learning and
consciousness.

When Less Is More: Costs and Benefits of Varied vs. Fixed Content and
Structure in Short Term Task Switching Training
Katrina Sabah1, Thomas Dolk1, Nachshon Meiran2 & Gesine Dreisbach1

Regensburg University, General and Applied Psychology Department; 2Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Psychology Department
katrina.sabah@gmail.com
1

Heretofore, little is known about which and how the different aspects of task variability impact
cognitive training outcomes. This study systematically examined the impact of variability across
different task components on outcome measures in short-term task switching training, manipulating
surface features (i.e. introduced stimuli and task rules) and the deeper structural task configuration
(i.e. repeat/switch trials sequence). Four training variability conditions were compared: Fixed
content\Fixed structure; Fixed Content\ Random Structure; Varied Content\Fixed Structure and
Varied Content\Varied Structure. The experiment included baseline block, seven training blocks
(learning phase), followed by two (near) transfer blocks, one with fixed and one with random task
structure, respectively. In the learning phase, training gains appeared more rapidly in the fixed
content as compared to the varied content conditions. Interestingly, training with fixed content
entailed significant costs when transferred to novel task switching context on both switch and repeat
trials. In contrast, moderate transfer gains were noted in the varied content condition, manifested
specifically on switch trials. These results suggest that task (content) variability is one means to
improve positive transfer and avoid negative transfer. Additionally, training gains seem harmful for
learning generalization.

222

Contributions

How does Working Memory Capacity influence Extraction Behavior in
CPR Dilemmas? - An Agent-Based Modeling Approach
Nadia Said1, Debora Fieberg2, Helen Fischer1, Johannes Lohse3 & Christian Kirches4

Heidelberg University, Experimental and Theoretical Psychology; 2Heidelberg University, Interdisciplinary Center for
Scientific Computing (IWR); 3University of Birmingham, Department of Economics; 4TU Braunschweig, Institut für
Mathematische Optimierung
nadia.said@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de
1

International fisheries, water or forests can be conceptualized as common pool resources (CPR). In
our experiment we identified the working memory capacity (WMC) as a key driver of individual
extraction behavior in a CPR simulation game. In particular we showed that, in the group condition,
participants with a higher WMC were more likely to extract too much, causing a premature
breakdown of the resource. In order to investigate the optimal level of WMC for sustainable resource
use, we combine agent-based modeling (ABM) with ACT-R an architecture used for modeling
cognitive processes. Using the ACT-R declarative memory module we can vary different parameters,
like W (working memory) and tau (retrieval threshold) which represent the cognitive abilities of
agents and therefore influence their extraction behavior. In this contribution we present our approach
to combine our mathematical model of the ACT-R declarative memory module (Said et al. 2016) with
ABM. We discuss the application of mathematical optimization methods which will allow us to
investigate (a) the distributions of agents decision strategies which are optimal for a sustainable
development of the resource (b) the optimal distribution of WMC and (c) if a limitation of WMC is
beneficial for an overall optimal decision process.

The epigenetics of depression: Methylation of the promoter region of
the serotonin transporter (SLC6A4) moderates the association between
critical life events and depression
Simon Sanwald, Christian Montag, Katharina Widenhorn-Müller, Carlos Schönfeldt-Lecuona,
Maximilian Gahr & Markus Kiefer
Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, III Sektion für kognitive Elektrophysiologie
simon.sanwald@uni-ulm.de

Epigenetic investigations are incrementally getting closer into focus of psychological research.
Trauma, anxiety-related personality traits and depression have frequently been associated with
alterations in the methylation pattern of the promoter region of the serotonin transporter gene
(SLC6A4). However, the exact effect of the serotonin system on anxiety-related personality traits and
depression remains an issue of controversial debate. The aim of this study was to further explore the
association between SLC6A4 promoter methylation, stressful life events, primary emotions and
depression. We therefore measured the methylation status of 71 CpG (5’-Cytosine-phosphateGuanine-3’) sites of the promoter region of SLC6A4 in 69 patients with major depression. The data
were analyzed with respect to self-reported critical life events (CLEQ), primary emotions (ANPS) and
depression severity (BDI-II). While there were no significant associations between SLC6A4 promoter
methylation and primary emotions, methylation status of single CpG sites was significantly
associated with critical life events and depression severity. We also found a moderation effect with
the association between critical life events and depression being significantly stronger in case of
lower methylation levels of a single CpG site (bp25586809). Thus, methylation of the promoter
region of SLC6A4 may be a factor influencing the relation between trauma and depression.

223

Contributions

Decoding the P600: MVPA evidence for shared neural patterns
underlying Oddball and syntactic violation processing
Jona Sassenhagen & Christian J. Fiebach

University of Frankfurt, Department of Psychology
jona.sassenhagen@gmail.com

The P600 Event-Related Brain Potential is usually interpreted as indicating language-specific
structural/combinatorial processing, with wide-reaching implications. P600 experiments critically
inform models of language processing. Moreover, P600 effects in non-linguistic paradigms are
widely seen as evidence for language-like grammars in domains like music, visual processing or
arithmetic. An alternative interpretation, rendering such cross-domain reverse inference invalid,
equates the P600 with the P3, a domain-general response to salience. We conducted a typical P600
study jointly with a non-linguistic Oddball experiment (eliciting a P3). Multivariate pattern analysis
was used to test if neural patterns from the Oddball experiment re-occur in the linguistic experiment.
Trials from the language experiment could be reliably classified on the basis of P3 patterns occurring
during the P600 time window. In a second experiment, we replicate the primary finding and
demonstrate its specificity by comparing it to cross-decoding from face processing or semantic
mismatch associated EEG responses. The cross-domain nature of P600 patterns speaks against its
interpretation as a language-specific index of structural/combinatorial processing. The P600, thus,
provides no direct evidence for language-like grammars in non-linguistic domains.

Planning and cognitive representation in manual action
Thomas Schack

CITEC; Neurocognition and Action - research group Bielefeld University
thomas.schack@uni-bielefeld.de

It has been shown that grasp postures are influenced by the goal of recently planned action. In
different experimental studies with children and adults we found arguments for anticipative motor
planning effects in manual action. Results of studies coming from a sequential object manipulation
task and from a dowel placing task. In this context we investigated furthermore the cognitive
representations of objects and the representation of grasping postures in memory. Subjects with
grasp comfort related and functionally well-structured representations were more likely to have
prospective motor planning than subjects whose cognitive representations were not structured by
anticipated grasp comfort. The results of such studies support the notion that cognitive action
representation plays a role in the planning and control of grasp postures. Another line of research
adressed retrospective aspects of motor planning in sequential tasks. It has been argued that such
sequential hysteresis effects reduce the movement planning costs by modifying the former plan
instead of creating a new movement plan from scratch. Results from different studies with a
sequential, perceptual-motor task are presented and providing further hints for the incorporation of
cognitive processes in manual action.

224

Contributions

Expertise in a demanding cognitive-motor dual-task situation:
Performance advantages of table tennis experts compared to novices
Sabine Schäfer

Saarland University, Institute of Sports Sciences
sabine.schaefer@uni-saarland.de

Theories on the acquisition of motor skills predict that earlier stages of skill acquisition require more
attentional resources than later stages (Fitts & Posner, 1967). Novices should therefore show higher
dual-task costs when performing a motor skill and a cognitive task concurrently. Most studies have
focused on performance changes in the motor task (for a review, see Schaefer, 2014), neglecting
potential performance decrements in cognition or possible trade-offs between the two task-domains.
The current study compared expert and novice table tennis players (n = 11 per group) who returned
balls from a ball machine while concurrently performing an auditory 3-back task. Balls and numbers
were either presented simultaneously or with a time-delay. There were no group differences in 3back performance in the single task. Both experts and novices showed dual-task costs in cognition,
but performance decrements were more pronounced in novices. A similar pattern emerged for the
number of missed balls in table tennis, except that experts outperformed novices already in the
single-task. In proportional dual-task costs, experts consistently showed costs of about 10 %, while
novices showed costs between 30 and 50 %. The findings indicate that performances of novices
suffer considerably in motor and cognitive domains.

How to stay positive: Integration or prevention of integration of
negative content to the self
Sarah Schäfer1, Dirk Wentura2 & Christian Frings1

University of Trier, Department of Cognitive Psychology; 2Saarland University, Department of Cognitive Psychology
and Statistics
schaefers@uni-trier.de

1

The self has been identified as an important factor influencing various cognitive processes. However,
research on effects of self-relevance was fundamentally influenced by the introduction of the so-called
matching paradigm (Sui, He, & Humphreys, 2012). In this paradigm, arbitrary stimuli are associated
with the participant’s self or a non-self-relevant other via instruction. In a subsequent matching task, a
self-prioritization effect is measurable, indicated by faster responses to self-related compared to otherrelated associations. Previous findings with the matching paradigm indicate that self-representations
are specific and functional (Schäfer, Frings, & Wentura, 2016; Schäfer, Wentura, & Frings, 2015).
In order to test whether the integration of instructed self-associations is unavoidable or whether a
striving for a positive self-representation can prevent harmful self-associations, we used the matching
paradigm to assess the integration of negative stimuli to the self. In a series of experiments we tested
the integration of negative stimuli to the self by comparing a typical matching-paradigm condition
(including neutral stimuli) with a condition in which participants learned associations with weapon
symbols (Exp. 1) or with negatively-tagged geometric shapes (using an evaluative-conditioning
procedure; Exp. 2). The results show that the self-prioritization effect was significantly modulated by
the valence of the associated stimuli.

225

Contributions

Reliance on Schemas in Metamemory Predictions: Differences between
Judgments of Learning and Judgments of Source
Marie Luisa Schaper1, Beatrice G. Kuhlmann2 & Ute J. Bayen1

Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Institut für Experimentelle Psychologie, Mathematische und Kognitive
Psychologie; 2Universität Mannheim, Fachbereich Psychologie, Kognitive und Differentielle Psychologie
marie.schaper@uni-duesseldorf.de

1

Metamemory research has thus far mostly focused on determinants of Judgments of Learning (JOLs).
In source monitoring, JOLs and Judgments of Source (JOSs) can be used to assess participants' itemmemory and source-memory predictions, respectively. In such tasks, people predict better memory for
schematically consistent than inconsistent source-item pairs, with a stronger effect on JOSs. We
asked whether these expectancy effects in predictions rely on schematic consistency or inconsistency
between items and two possible sources. Participants (n = 96) studied consistent (e.g., nightstand bedroom) and inconsistent (e.g., bed - bathroom) source-item pairs. The degrees of source-item
consistency and inconsistency were gradually varied. Participants provided item-wise JOLs and JOSs.
Both an item’s relationships with its own source as well as with the alternative source influenced
memory predictions. Higher consistency of an item with either source resulted in higher JOLs.
However, higher consistency resulted in higher JOSs in consistent trials and in lower JOSs in
inconsistent trials. Higher inconsistency with an item’s own (alternative) source resulted in lower
(higher) judgments. These effects were stronger on JOSs than JOLs. Thus, schematic source-item
relationships affected both judgments. The differences between JOLs and JOSs indicate that they
capture different aspects of metamemory.

Information Search in Every-Day Decisions: The Generalizability of the
Attraction Search Effect
Sophie Elisabeth Scharf, Arndt Bröder & Monika Wiegelmann
University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology
soscharf@mail.uni-mannheim.de

The new Integrated Coherence-based Decision and Search model (iCodes; Jekel, Glöckner, &
Bröder, under review) makes the unique prediction that the direction of information search depends
on the already available information. It predicts that information is searched for the currently more
attractive option, the so-called Attraction Search Effect. Two experiments by Jekel et al. supported this
prediction using a probabilistic inference task, set in an abstract stock market scenario. The goal of
this project is to test whether the Attraction Search Effect generalizes to preferential choice tasks in
more realistic decision scenarios. Two online experiments were conducted that presented
participants with every-day decision scenarios. The first experiment used an identical task structure to
that of Jekel et al. with severely restricted search while employing six different content scenarios. The
second study introduced six additional semantic contents while implementing a new task structure
with less restrictive search. Both experiments support the existence of the Attraction Search Effect in
preferential choice tasks. This shows that the unique predictions of iCodes are not restricted to
specific item material and decision scenarios but generalize to a variety of settings. The
generalizability of the Attraction Search Effect supports the validity of iCodes’s process assumptions.

226

Contributions

Sensitivity of pupil dilation and EEG alpha frequency band power for
working memory load in n-back and span working memory tasks
Christian Scharinger1, Alexander Soutschek2, Torsten Schubert3 & Peter Gerjets4

Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien Tübingen; 2Laboratory for Social and Neural Systems Research, University of
Zurich; 3Department of Psychology, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg; 4Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien
Tübingen; Department of Psychology, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen
c.scharinger@iwm-tuebingen.de

1

Pupil dilation and EEG alpha frequency band power (a-FBP) have generally been reported as
sensitive measures for working memory (WM) load. For increasing WM load the eye-pupil dilates
whereas the parietal a-FBP decreases. In the current study (N = 25) we were interested whether both
measures would be comparably sensitive for WM load in two different WM tasks, a digit span
(dSpan) and an n-back task that were matched with respect to perceptual and motoric requirements.
In the dSpan subjects had to memorize sequences of up to eight single digits in correct serial order
while simultaneously indicating the parity of the digits. In the n-back task (1-3-back) subjects had to
indicate whether a current digit in a sequence matched the digit n-steps back. As expected, in the nback task the pupil dilated and the a-FBP decreased for increasing n-back levels. However, the
measures showed different sensitivities for different load-levels. In the dSpan the a-FBP decreased for
increasing WM load from the first digit on whereas the pupil dilated not until the fourth digit on.
Interestingly, both measures indicated overall lower WM load for the n-back as compared to the
dSpan task. We will discuss these outcomes in detail.

How does the peak-end rule smell? Tracing hedonic experience with
odors
Benjamin Scheibehenne1 & Géraldine Coppin2

University of Geneva, Geneva School of Economics and Management; 2University of Geneva, Swiss Center for
Affective Sciences; University of Geneva, Laboratory for the Study of Emotion Elicitation and Expression; Distance
Learning University Switzerland (Unidistance)
benjamin.scheibehenne@unige.ch
1

The peak-end rule predicts that retrospective evaluations of affective events heavily depend on the
most intense and last moment, and it implies duration neglect. The rule was originally proposed for
negative experiences such as painful medical procedures. It is unclear however if it also applies to
positive experiences. Previously, rigorous comparisons between both domains were hindered
because it required qualitatively different stimuli. To overcome this constraint and to test the
hypothesis in a genuinely affective domain, we repeatedly presented participants in two experiments
(n = 48 each) with continuous sequences of odors delivered directly into their noses using an
olfactometer. Participants rated each sequence continuously and provided retrospective ratings
afterwards. Odor sequences differed in valence (positive vs. negative), trajectory (increasing,
decreasing, u-shaped, and inversely u-shaped), and length (short vs. long). Results based on a
multilevel analysis confirm that the peak and the end received higher weight in the retrospective
ratings, hence providing evidence for the peak-end rule for both, positive and negative events.
Likewise, retrospective ratings were independent of length (indicating duration neglect). Results are
discussed in the light of recent research on information integration and affective experiences.

227

Contributions

Effects of motor inhibition on n – 2 repetition costs
Juliane Scheil1, Thomas Kleinsorge1 & Baptist Liefooghe2

Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors (IfADo); 2Ghent University
scheil@ifado.de
1

Research on motor imagery (MI) suggests that overt actions during motor imagery are prevented,
either by emitting only subthreshold motor commands to effectors, or because motor command
inhibition is evoked. Inhibitory processes are also assumed to be involved in task switching, with n –
2 repetition costs as a behavioral marker. In the present study, we combined both lines of research
to investigate the involvement of inhibitory processes in MI. To this end, a task switching experiment
was designed in which participants had to switch among three tasks, with responses being executed
either overtly or covertly (whereby the latter was assumed to involve MI). Large n – 2 repetition costs
were visible for overt responses in n – 2 that were followed by a covert response in n – 1, while in
the other conditions, no significant n – 2 repetition costs could be observed. This result suggests that
when MI takes places during trial n – 1, inhibition is invoked that also increases the inhibition of the
task that was executed in trial n – 2. Furthermore, the results provide evidence for an involvement of
motor inhibition in the emergence of n – 2 repetition costs.

L1 and L2 distance effects in learning L3 Dutch
Job Johannes Schepens
Freie Universität Berlin
jobschepens@gmail.com

Cross-linguistic differences have a large and varied impact on the way previously learned languages
(L1, L2, ..., Ln) determine the ability to learn an additional language (Ln+1). Understanding this
variation is crucial to support learners with different language backgrounds who need to successfully
learn additional languages for their day-to-day lives. However, little is known about why crosslinguistic differences are important, what the important differences are, and if their importance varies
across previously learned languages (L1, L2, etc.). Here, we show that there are L1 and L2 linguistic
distance effects and that they independently influence the learnability of Dutch as an L3: Both larger
L1 and L2 distances correlate with lower degrees of L3 learnability. Lexical and morphological
distance measures together explained 47.7% of the variation across L1s and 32.4% across L2s. The
evidence comes from speaking proficiency test scores on the state exam Dutch as a Second
Language by a large number of candidates who speak a diverse set of first languages (L1s) and
additional languages (L2s). We conclude that cross-linguistic differences require language learners
to bridge varying linguistic gaps between their first and second language competences and the
target language depending on linguistic distance.

228

Contributions

The psychometrics of the continuous mind: Exploiting the dynamics of
mouse movements with time continuous multiple regression
Stefan Scherbaum1 & Maja Dshemuchadse2

Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Psychology; 2Hochschule Zittau/Görlitz, Department of Social
Sciences
stefan.scherbaum@tu-dresden.de
1

Psychometrics usually relies on discrete measures, e.g. answers in questionnaires or responses in
tasks. This focus on discrete measures neglects the information that is present in the process leading
to an answer or a response. Mouse tracking promises to open a continuous window on such
processes, but mouse tracking studies do not exploit the full potential of the method, that is, the
extraction of dynamic, psychometrically valid markers for the different sub-processes which are
intertwined on the way to the final response. I will present a method, time continuous multiple
regression (TCMR), that extracts dynamic markers for the different sub-processes leading to a
response. From these dynamic markers, the method extracts information about the timing, the
duration, and the strength of the influence of the different sub-processes. I will present results on the
psychometric properties of these dynamic markers, i.e. reliability and validity. Furthermore, I will
illustrate how these dynamic markers can further be applied in group-level studies, e.g. on
differences between the Flanker and the Simon task. All analyses presented can be performed with
the TCMR Matlab toolbox that is provided for download (osf.io/5e3vn).

Combining the post-cue task and the perceptual identification task to
investigate parallel activation and mutual facilitation in semantic
priming
Demian Scherer1 & Dirk Wentura2

University of Münster, Department of Psychology; 2Saarland University, Department of Psychology
demian.scherer@uni-muenster.de
1

Recent theories suggest that semantically similar concepts mutually facilitate their activation when
they are concurrently active. We investigated this claim using semantic priming. More precisely, in
two experiments, a perceptual identification task was employed. Prime-target pairs were briefly
presented and masked, with a stimulus onset asynchrony of 0 ms. A cue defined which of two
simultaneously presented words was the target. Participants were instructed to identify the target. In
Experiment 1, the target-defining-cue was presented at stimulus onset, while in Experiment 2 the cue
was not presented before the offset of the stimuli. Thus, in Experiment 2, a post-cue task was
combined with the perceptual identification task. We obtained significant semantic priming effects in
both experiments. This result is compatible with the view that two concepts can both be activated in
parallel and can mutually facilitate each other when they are semantically related. A potential link of
this assumption to working memory research will be discussed.

229

Contributions

Kontaktanaloges Distanz-Tachometer - Auswirkungen auf das
Situationsbewusstsein, die Geschwindigkeitsregulierung und die
Arbeitsbelastung
Frederik Schewe & Mark Vollrath

Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institut für Psychologie, Ingenieur- und Verkehrspsychologie
f.schewe@tu-braunschweig.de

Abstract: Die von dem Fahrer gewählte Geschwindigkeit ist aufgrund ihrer Auswirkungen auf die
Sicherheit und Effizienz ein wesentlicher Faktor des Straßenverkehrs. Durch den technischen
Fortschritt ergeben sich neue Möglichkeiten der Geschwindigkeitsbeeinflussung. Basierend auf
Car2X-Kommunikation können dezentrale Prozesse sowie das zentrale Verkehrsmanagement
kontinuierlich die optimale Geschwindigkeit für einzelne Fahrzeuge ermitteln und vorgeben. Zu
diesem Zweck wurde eine Anzeige entwickelt, bei der Distanzen in einem Head-Up-Display
kontaktanalog visualisiert werden, um so die Geschwindigkeit darzustellen. Es wurde eine
experimentelle Fahrsimulatorstudie (n = 52) durchgeführt, bei der das Kontaktanaloge DistanzTachometer mit einer herkömmlichen Tacho-Anzeige verglichen wurde. Beide Gruppen fuhren
mehrfach Szenarien in einer Folgefahrt und einer freien Fahrt mit unterschiedlichen
Geschwindigkeitsbegrenzungen. Als wesentliche abhänge Variablen wurden die mittlere
Geschwindigkeit in der freien Fahrt und der mittlere Abstand in der Folgefahrt gemessen, um damit
die Eignung des neuen Displays zur Regulation der Geschwindigkeit zu prüfen. Ein weiteres
Experiment ist geplant, um zu prüfen, in welchem Umfang das Kontaktanaloge Distanz-Tachometer
die Geschwindigkeitswahl in einem kooperativen Verkehrsraum beeinflussen kann.

Tinted lenses affect our physiological responses to affective pictures:
An EEG/ERP study
Tim Schilling1, Siegfried Wahl2 & Lewis Chuang3

University of Tübingen, Institute for Ophthalmic Research; Department of Perception, Cognition and Action, Max
Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics; 2University of Tübingen, Institute for Ophthalmic Research; Carl Zeiss
Vision International GmbH; 3Department of Perception, Cognition and Action, Max Planck Institute for Biological
Cybernetics
tim-tobias.schilling@uni-tuebingen.de
1

Colors can have an influence on the emotional processing of affective stimuli. In this work, we
investigate if the emotional processing of images from the International-Affective-Picture-System (IAPS;
Lang et al., 2008) are modulated when experienced through tinted lenses. The experiment (N=20)
presented IAPS images (Valence: neutral, pleasant, unpleasant) for a duration of 3s and participants
wore tinted lenses (Tint: none, Blue, Red, Yellow, Green). During image presentation, we measured
EEG/ERP and Skin-Conductance-Response (SCR). We found that phasic SCR was significantly
diminished with Red. In the EEG, we observed an ERP component that differentiated for the factors of
Valence and Tint, which was similar to the late-positive-potential (i.e., LPP; 500-1500ms; FCz). An
ANOVA of the mean voltage potential returned significant main effects for Valence (F(2,38)=15.0,
p<.05, ω²=.41) and Tint (F(4,76)=3.46, p<.05, ω²=.11) and their interaction (F(8,152)=2.12,
p<.05, ω²=.05). With neutral images, yellow tinted lens resulted in largest LPP compared to none.
With pleasant and unpleasant images, red tinted lens diminished the LPP response relative to none.
To conclude, red tinted lenses appear to suppress an arousal response to high valence images.
Interestingly, individuals with meditation experience have similarly been reported to reduce LPP
responses to negative images (Sobolewski et al., 2011).

230

Contributions

When positive and negative is not the same: Evaluation of emotional
words using event-related potentials
Sebastian Schindler

Ghent University; Bielefeld University
sebastian.schindler@uni-bielefeld.de

Studies on affective language processing show that, compared to neutral words, emotional words
are characterized by amplifications of certain emotion-related ERP components: The Early Posterior
Negativity (EPN) and the Late Positive Potential (LPP). However, although we can easily distinguish
between negative and positive words, their ERP amplitude pattern is typically highly similar. To
characterize under which circumstances ERPs can be distinguished between positive and negative
words, two EEG experiments were performed. In a first experiment, participants were asked to either
passively watch negative and positive words or evaluate (i.e. classify) these words. While no
differences were found in the passive viewing condition, the word evaluation task revealed a
lateralization for valencein the LPP. Here, larger LPP amplitudes were found for negative words over
left and positive words over right sensors. In the second experiment, participants were tested in a
pseudo-interactive scenario. They could accept or reject evaluative feedback based on single
adjectives, putatively sent from another participant. Results showed a substantial increase in LPP
amplitudes for positive words, which was even present one week after initial testing. Thus,
communicative context as well as task-demands modulate valence specific word processing,
suggesting that ERPs can distinguish between emotional valence.

Reward magnitude influences decision accuracy and stimulus
generalization in multi-attribute categorization
René Schlegelmilch & Bettina von Helversen
University of Zurich
r.schlegelmilch@psychologie.uzh.ch

Task reward has been shown to affect memory and generalization in several tasks, but whether
reward magnitude influences category learning is unclear. In the current project we examine how
differences in reward magnitude affect categorization decisions. We investigate the underlying
relationship between reward magnitude and memory representations by testing two mechanisms
within the framework of exemplar models. Specifically, we test whether reward influences (1)
memory strength, i.e. the accessibility of exemplars in memory, and (2) exemplar generalization, i.e.
differences in the perceived similarity to novel items, which are two parameters in the generalized
context model (GCM, Nosofsky, 2011). We present two studies addressing these open questions. In
both studies, participants first underwent a category learning phase. Correct categorizations yielded
different rewards for specific exemplars (high vs. low). A test phase followed, including novel stimuli.
Overall, introducing differences in reward magnitude reliably decreased accuracy for low reward
exemplars during category learning, without increasing accuracy for high reward exemplars. Using
a Bayesian hierarchical approach, we modeled categorizations in the test phase with the GCM. The
evidence suggests, that novel decisions are more sensitive to high than to low reward exemplars.
Reward magnitude therefore relates to generalization, but not memory strength.

231

Contributions

Visual mismatch negativity under inattentional blindness in a roving
oddball paradigm
Insa Schloßmacher, Maximilian Bruchmann & Thomas Straube

University of Münster, Institute of Medical Psychology and Systems Neuroscience
insa.schlossmacher@uni-muenster.de

The existence of a visual counterpart of auditory mismatch negativity has been established in
numerous studies in the last decades. However, several open questions about modulatory influences
of awareness and task demands on visual mismatch negativity (vMMN) still remain. Here, a roving
oddball paradigm with varying stimulus repetitions was used in order to elicit vMMN between the
first (deviant) and fourth (standard) stimulus. Geometrical shapes made from line segments (i.e.
squares & rectangles) were presented together with a demanding foreground task based on Pitts,
Martínez, and Hillyard (2011). Electrophysiological responses were obtained in three physically
identical phases that differed only with respect to the subject’s instructions: subjects (1) were
uninformed about the shapes and attended the foreground task (inattentional blind) (2) were
informed about the shapes but still attended the foreground task (3) attended the shapes. In phase 1
we obtained evidence for vMMN elicitation when subjects were inattentional blind. Furthermore,
vMMN was clearly modulated by task demands leading to a stronger vMMN in phase 3 compared
to phase 2. Taken together results show that vMMN can be elicited without conscious perception of
stimuli, but is susceptible to task demands.

Investigating emotion-induced retrograde and anterograde memory
effects in sequences of related and unrelated words
Helge Schlüter & Christina Bermeitinger

University of Hildesheim, Department of General Psychology
helge.schlueter@uni-hildesheim.de

It is of the utmost importance for an organism to rapidly detect and react to changes in its
environment. The emotional oddball paradigm (EOP) has been repeatedly used to investigate the
special role of emotional content in change detection. It has also proven useful in tapping emotioninduced memory effects by using emotional oddballs in a stream of neutral standard information. The
present study aimed to reveal potential differential effects of oddball valence (negative, neutral, or
positive) on the free recall performance of neighboring standard words. Furthermore, the semantic
relatedness of the word lists was manipulated within two versions of an experiment. While oddball
effects of negative emotion were observed in both versions, effects on stimuli preceding an oddball
(retrograde effects) and effects on stimuli following an oddball (anterograde effects) did not reach
significance. Results are additionally discussed in the light of general methodological issues of the
research on emotion-induced retrograde and anterograde amnesic (detrimental)/hypermnesic
(enhancing) effects.

232

Contributions

Inferring causal history from shape
Filipp Schmidt & Roland W. Fleming

Justus Liebig University Giessen, Experimental Psychology
filipp.schmidt@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Every object in our environment has its shape due to some kind of generative process, such as
manufacture or biological growth. There is very little research on if and how we perceive and infer
this causal history from current object shape. To investigate this inference, we took photos of objects
from six different materials ("wax", "aluminium foil", "gold foil", "chicken wire", "putty",
"cardboard") transformed by one of four different transformations ("folded", "bent", "crumpled",
"twisted"). By varying details of transformation, arrangement and viewpoint, we obtained 30 shots
of each material/transformation combination (720 images). We asked different groups of
participants to (1) name transformations and materials, (2) classify each image into the four given
transformation classes, and to (3) rate each image with respect to the extent the object was
transformed by each of the four transformations. Our results show that participants can infer
transformations from object shape-with accuracy being modulated by object material. This inference
of causal history from current object shape is only possible if we can distinguish between intrinsic
(material) and extrinsic (transformation) properties of the object. This separation of observed shape
features by their causal origin (shape scission) presumably involves both perceptual and cognitive
abilities.

An Episodic Memory Account of Cued Task Switching
James R. Schmidt, Baptist Liefooghe & Jan De Houwer
Ghent University
james.schmidt@ugent.be

In this talk, it is shown how the latest version of the Parallel Episodic Processing (PEP) model can
simulate a range of findings from the cued task switching literature. In cued task switching,
participants respond to a target stimulus (e.g., “9”) by executing one of two tasks (e.g., parity or
magnitude decisions) on the basis of a task cue. The switch cost is the finding that performance is
hindered when the task alternates rather than repeats from that executed on the previous trial.
Though often interpreted in terms of higher-order control processes (e.g., task set reconfiguration), it
has be argued that the bulk of the switch cost is probably due to episodic biases (e.g., cue repetition
benefits and stimulus-response bindings). In the present simulations, an episodic memory model
produces not only the switch cost, but but also a range of other benchmark findings and novel
predictions. In our episodic framework, most of these findings result from feature integration
(binding) biases and have little or nothing to do with the switching of the task itself. Given the
parsimony and unique explanatory power of the episodic account presented here, our results
suggest that competing cognitive control accounts might be needlessly complex.

233

Contributions

Situation Modification in Conflict Tasks
Constantin Schmidts

Julius Maximilians Universität, Department of Psychology
constantin.schmidts@uni-wuerzburg.de

Humans cope with cognitive conflict in various ways, such as focusing on task-relevant instead of
task-irrelevant information or avoiding situations where conflict is likely. These adaptations to conflict
resemble those used to cope with negative affect. We examined whether situation modification, a
strategy derived from the extended process model of emotion regulation, may influence responding
in cognitive conflict tasks. This should be evident by a facilitation of actions that consistently modify
situations towards congruent (positive) situations rather than to incongruent (negative) situations. In
four experiments, participants modified stimuli in a color-word Stroop task towards congruent or
incongruent stimuli of (un)predictable identity. A modification effect emerged, insofar as participants
were faster when they foreseeably produced congruent stimuli of predictable identity than when they
produced incongruent stimuli or stimuli of unpredictable identity. Our results add to the body of
evidence connecting affect and cognitive conflict, and reveal a constraint when using situation
modification as a means to regulate cognitive conflict.

Individual Differences in Post-Error Slowing
Florian Schmitz1, Doris Keye2, Klaus Oberauer3 & Oliver Wilhelm4

Universität Duisburg-Essen; 2DLR Hamburg; 3University of Zürich; 4Ulm University
florian.schmitz@uni-due.de
1

Error-related processes are considered relevant markers of working memory functioning, with post
error slowing (PES) as the most prominent behavioral indicator. Accounts of PES emphasize both
cognitive (e.g., biasing task-demand units and other control processes) as well as non-cognitive
factors (e.g., an increase in response caution). PES may therefore reflect a multitude of underlying
processes and is currently poorly understood from an individual differences perspective. In the
current study, 140 research participants completed an Eriksen and a Flanker paradigm with 1400
trials each. Additionally, the battery comprised indicators of working memory capacity (WMC) and
different facets of self-reported impulsivity. Response time data were modeled with bifactor CFA, with
baseline speed as a general factor in each task, and response-conflict and PES as nested specific
factors. Replicating previous findings, response-conflict specific variance extracted in both conflict
paradigms was not correlated. However, there was a moderate relationship of PES across tasks,
offering some evidence of individual differences in PES. Yet, PES was independent of WMC and selfreported impulsivity. Diffusion model analyses suggest that individual differences in PES reflect, in
particular, increased response caution and increased non-decision time after committing an error.

234

Contributions

Pragmatic Processing: An Experimental Investigation of
Presuppositions Triggered By Definite Articles
Cosima Schneider1, Michael Franke2, Carolin Schonard3, Gerhard Jäger2 & Markus Janczyk1

University of Tübingen, Department of Psychology; 2University of Tübingen, Institute of Linguistics; 3TU Chemnitz
cosima.schneider@uni-tuebingen.de
1

A presupposition (PSP) is a condition that has to be met in order for a linguistic expression to be
appropriate. Certain linguistic expressions routinely trigger appropriateness conditions/PSPs. The
definite article is one PSP trigger and it creates the (uniqueness) PSP: For example, if in a given
context there are two bananas and one pear, it is felicitous to utter: “Give me the pear”, but the
appropriate condition is violated when the speaker says “Give me the banana”. In this study we
investigate the processing of PSPs using mouse-tracking in a verification task. This setup allows to
compare the processing of sentences with definite and indefinite articles in pragmatically felicitous
and infelicitous contexts, and to gain insight into the temporal dynamics of this processing. The data
show that PSP processing is context dependent: Sentences with infelicitous definite articles
interpreted in the global context require additional processing time. In sum, our study is the first
attempt to provide mouse-tracking data for PSP processing and it gives insights into the temporal
processing of PSPs triggered by the definite article.

Changing working memory states by means of retroactive cues: What
can lateralized effects in the EEG tell us?
Daniel Schneider, Anna Barth, Laura-Isabelle Klatt & Edmund Wascher
Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors
schneiderd@ifado.de

Attentional shifts based on retroactive cues (retro-cues) facilitate performance in working memory
(WM) tasks. This retro-cue benefit is related to the concentration of WM resources on a subset of
representations at the cost of non-cued items. However, the attentional mechanisms underlying this
process are still largely unexplained. Given this, we applied delayed estimation WM tasks and
measured lateralized effects in the EEG following retro-cues to either left- or right-lateralized memory
items. Retro-cues elicited an early posterior contralateral negativity (PCN), an anterior directing
attention negativity (ADAN) and a posterior contralateral suppression in alpha power, indicating
transient attentional shifts toward the cued information. We further concentrated on contralateral
delay activity (CDA) as an indicator for the active storage of information in visuo-spatial WM.
Modulations of CDA have been only infrequently associated with retroactive attentional orienting.
We show that these ambiguous findings might be due to the fact that a retro-cue related modulation
of the CDA is reduced to trials with a highly accurate response. Thus, not only the selection of cued
contents and their transfer into a higher-level (e.g., response-related) state, but also the selective
storage of information in the form of visuo-spatial representations constitutes the retro-cue benefit in
WM tasks.

235

Contributions

Controlling statistical decision errors with minimal costs: Relative
efficiency of sequential probability ratio t-tests vs. Bayesian t-tests
Martin Schnuerch & Edgar Erdfelder

University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology
martin.schnuerch@psychologie.uni-mannheim.de

Neyman and Pearson’s statistical decision theory represents the normative standard for most
statistical tests in psychological research nowadays. A crucial feature of this theory is the a priori
determination of sample sizes, often resulting in large required samples. To minimize costs,
researchers frequently violate this principle by recursively applying significance tests and stopping
the sampling process whenever a “significant” (i.e., p < .05) outcome is observed. However, this
practice boosts the risk of decision errors. Sequential tests provide an attractive alternative to
classical procedures as they are designed to control these errors in a time- and cost-efficient manner.
Recently, Schönbrodt, Wagenmakers, Zehetleitner, and Perugini (2017) proposed Sequential Bayes
Factors (SBF) as a method to increase efficiency in testing mean differences. We argue that
Sequential Probability Ratio Tests (SPRT) proposed by Wald (1945) not only typically require smaller
samples than SBF to achieve the same accuracy but also control predetermined error probabilities in
the long run. We introduce a simple procedure that implements SPRT for a sequential t-test in R,
compare it to SBF by means of simulation, and show that the SPRT procedure has optimal properties
for a wide range of population scenarios.

Validate mouse tracking: How design factors influence action
dynamics in intertemporal decision making
Martin Schoemann1, Malte Lüken1, Tobias Grage1, Pascal J. Kieslich2 & Stefan Scherbaum1

Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Psychology; 2University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology
martin.schoemann@tu-dresden.de
1

Mouse-tracking as process-tracing method builds on the assumption that the continuity of mind leaks
into the continuity of movements. Given this assumption, it is an important question whether the
assumed interaction between mind and movement might be influenced by the measurement itself,
that is, design factors of the of mouse-tracking procedure. Hence, we conducted two mouse-tracking
studies (N=40 each) in which we systematically investigated the influence of design factors on the
quality of mouse-tracking measures, and hence, the reported effects. We used a mouse-tracking
version of a classical intertemporal choice task that has previously been used to examine the
dynamics of temporal discounting and the date-delay effect (Dshemuchadse, Scherbaum, &
Goschke, 2013). Between studies, we varied the starting procedure. Within studies and between
participants, we varied the response procedure. Within studies and within participants, we varied
the stimuli location. Our results suggest that design factors influence the interaction between mind
and movement and therefore have impact on mouse-tracking measures, the reported effects, and
eventually, the validity of mouse-tracking as process-tracing method.

236

Contributions

The influence of attitudes and knowledge on the continued influence
effect
Sebastian Scholz, Thorsten Finke & Stephan Dutke
University of Münster, Department of Psychology
sebastian.scholz@uni-muenster.de

Research demonstrated that corrected misinformation continues to influence memory. We
hypothesized that this effect would be attenuated by extended knowledge about and positive
attitudes toward the misinformation. In an online experiment, participants (N = 216) completed
questionnaires regarding preexisting attitudes and knowledge about genetically modified food and
then received written statements dealing with this topic. One of these statements was later corrected
for half of the participants. All participants were then asked to make continuative inferences about
these statements. We were interested in whether a correction would induce participants to update
their memory of the statements and make fewer references to the misinformation. In accordance with
prior studies, we found that a correction decreased but didn’t eliminate the continued influence of
misinformation. Positive attitudes towards the topic led to fewer references to the misinformation but
didn’t interact with the correction. Knowledge about the topic, however, did neither influence the
processing of misinformation nor the impact of the correction. These results are in line with a mental
model explanation of the continued influence effect and discussed in the context of attitude congruent
memory. Overall, the continuing influence of misinformation despite correction can have potential
consequences for everyday life.

The Vertical Dimension and Viewing Angle in the Perception of
Artworks and Faces
Lars-Michael Schöpper1 & Helmut Leder2

University of Trier, Department of Psychology; 2University of Vienna, Department of Basic Psychological Research
and Research Methods
lars-michael.schoepper@univie.ac.at

1

Research on metaphors and embodiment suggests a conceptual link between affect and the vertical
dimension, which can be summarized as “positive = up” and “negative = down”. We investigated,
if emotionally valent artworks are liked more when hanging congruent with the metaphorical
concept, respectively looking up or down to them. Building up on previous research, we also
investigated if looking up to male faces and looking down to female faces makes them appear more
attractive, resulting from an average height difference between men and women. We assumed an
interaction with participant’s sex, viewing angle and stimulus’ sex. Participants rated printed
artworks and faces, which were hung in low and high positions in a room. We calculated the
viewing angle by subtracting the height of each image from the eye height of every participant. For
the category of faces, we found no effect of viewing angle. For the category of artworks, we found a
rather unexpected effect of viewing angle, in that looking down at artworks increased their
perceived quality. In exploratory analyses, we found interactions of height difference with valence
(and other factors), some of which were incongruent with the metaphorical concept. Results suggest
alternative consequences of head tilt.

237

Contributions

Less is more! Cross-modal Effects of Music Event Rate on Product
Perceptions
Robert Schorn1, Alexandra Brunner-Sperdin2 & Dagmar Abfalter3

UMIT - University for Health Sciences, Medical Informatics and Technology, Institute of Psychology; 2University of
Applied Sciences, Kufstein; 3University of Music and Performing Arts
robert.schorn@umit.at
1

An increasing number of customers are choosing to order their products online. Customers inevitably
make inferences on size when they consider a product presented online. Previous studies have
shown that structural differences in background music can influence customers’ perceptions of
product attributes through cross-modal inference. Relating to cross-modal effects we propose that the
event rate (number of notes per beat) has an influence on consumers’ perceptions of product size.
We conducted a 2 (music mode: major vs. minor) x 2 (music tempo: slow vs. fast) x 2 (notes per
beat: two vs. four) between-subjects experimental design. Dependent variables were participants’
estimates regarding the size of food (picture of burger, pizza, wine bottle). The outcomes of this
study suggest that music with a lower event rate creates a bigger mental image of the product and
consequently creates a larger incentive to purchase food items. An adverse effect may be true for
electronic apparel, where smaller is considered better.

If you always tell the truth you don’t have to remember anything:
New insights into the implicit memory of lying
Franziska Annett Schreckenbach, Klaus Rothermund & Nicolas Koranyi
Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Department of General Psychology II
franziska.schreckenbach@uni-jena.de

Nowadays, it is commonly known that we often use lies to form our social interactions in a positive
way, but if we are detected, social exclusion can be the consequence. This is why everyone knows
that a liar should have a good memory, as it is important to remember the lies we told. Accordingly,
knowledge about having lied has been shown to be retrieved automatically when one reencounters
the same question that one has lied to before (Koranyi, Schreckenbach, & Rothermund, 2015). After
a similar mechanism has been observed for pictures of persons (Schreckenbach, Rothermund, &
Koranyi, submitted), the question arose whether a combination of these cues would produce similar
effects. In the present experiment participants were orally interviewed and had to lie to one of two
different topics. Subsequently, they completed a categorization task in which the words “honest” and
“dishonest” had to be classified, while pictures and questions in combination were used as taskirrelevant primes. In line with our assumptions, automatic retrieval was found after the presentation of
a question that one has lied to in combination with the picture of the interviewer, whereas no effect
emerged after the presentation of truthful questions or an unknown person.

238

Contributions

Acceptance of Mobile EEG-Devices
Friederice Schröder1 & Thea Radüntz2

Technische Universität Berlin, Department of Psychology and Ergonomics, Chair of Cognitive Psychology and
Cognitive Ergonomics; 2Federal Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Unit 3.4 - Mental Health and
Cognitive Capacity
friederice.schroeder@tu-berlin.de
1

Using traditional EEG-systems outside a laboratory reveals many limitations. Mobile EEG-systems can
compensate many of the traditional EEG disadvantages. Their future use in research depends on
several factors. One important concern relates to the participants’ acceptance of mobile EEGdevices. In this study 24 participants experienced seven mobile EEG-devices on seven consecutive
days. They performed a number of paired comparisons and ranked the systems regarding comfort
and appearance to find the best mobile EEG-device. In addition, they performed a cross-modalitymatching-task while wearing the EEG-devices, to control for memory-effects. For that, they had to
describe the discomfort of the devices and their current affective condition by pressing a hand
dynamometer. The Emotiv EPOC-system (with a flexible design and saline based wet sensors) was
favored by most of the participants in the paired comparisons. Consistently, EPOC was favored
regarding comfort and appearance in the ranking procedure too. Finally, the cross-modalitymatching showed similar results. We conclude that comfort and appearance have an influence on
the participants’ acceptance of mobile EEG-devices. However, further research is needed to finally
evaluate the advantages of mobile EEG-devices over traditional systems, e.g. regarding the signal
quality, which is part of an additional study.

The development of eye-movements when learning to read in a new
orthography
Sascha Schroeder, Simon P. Tiffin-Richards & Katharina Pittrich

Max Planck Institute for Human Development MPRG REaD (Reading Education and Development)
sascha.schroeder@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

In this study, we investigated the development of adults' eye-movements when they learn to read in a
new orthography. Ten participants learned to read simple German sentences which were, however,
written using Greek letters. Some letters (e.g., M) were written identical in both scripts, some (e.g., a)
were visually similar, and some (e.g., h) were different in both scripts. Subjects participated in nine
sessions which were separated by one week. In each session, their eye-movements were recorded.
in addition, their reading behavior for unchanged, normally presented items in the first and last
session. Moreover, we are able to compare their performance to children's eye-movements in grades
2-4 reading the same sentences in unchanged script. Results showed that adults' initial performance
on reading sentences in the new orthography in the first session was very similar to 2nd graders
reading the same sentences in standard script. Adults constantly adapted to the new script and their
learning curve followed a power law distribution. Reading times for sentences decreased. This effect
is mainly driven by a decrease of refixations and regressions. We discuss our results in regard to
current models of eye-movement development.

239

Contributions

The impact of hypertext presentation on readers’ attention and text
comprehension
Torsten Schubert1, Teresa Ronja Schurer2 & Bertram Opitz2

Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Institut für Psychologie; 2Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg,
Zentrum für multimediales Lehren und Lernen
teresa.schurer@llz.uni-halle.de

1

E-Learning has become increasingly popular and reading digital texts is a common practice for
many people. Prior studies showed that the coherence of a text can influence text comprehensibility
with low degrees of coherence causing attention failures and difficulties for the construction of a
mental model from the text. Importantly, in hypertexts the use of embedded links represents an
additional source, which can affect the efficiency of cognitive processing during reading. In
particular, the use of the links can influence the comprehension process by redirecting reader`s
attention and by interrupting the construction of a mental model from the text. Here, we investigated
how the degree of coherence and the need to use hyperlinks affect reader’s attention and the
efficiency of text comprehension. Attention of readers was tested by counting Mind Wandering
(MW) episodes by asking readers to judge about their current thought contents during unexpected
MW probes. Text comprehension was investigated by presenting special questions about text content
after reading. Results showed that MW episodes were less frequent when participants read the
coherent hypertext version. In addition, participants showed better comprehension performance
under conditions of high coherence texts. These findings provide insights into processing attention
during reading online texts.

Applying the diffusion model to research on cognitive control
Stefanie Schuch

RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Psychology
schuch@psych.rwth-aachen.de

Cognitive control refers to processes facilitating goal-directed behavior. One empirical tool to
investigate cognitive control is the task-switching paradigm, where the ability to flexibly switch
between different goals is explored. In this talk, I will present some examples of how diffusion
modeling of reaction-time data can help to better understand task-switching processes. I will focus on
N-2 task repetition costs, which denote the performance difference between task sequences of types
ABA (returning to a task after one intermediate trial) and CBA (returning after two or more
intermediate trials). I will also discuss the aftereffect of N-2 task repetition trials: Performance is
facilitated after ABA, relative to after CBA, which is called the N-3 effect. The results can be
summarized as follows: N-2 task repetition costs are mainly reflected in the drift rate parameter,
suggesting that task interference is related to noisier task representations. The N-3 effect so far could
not be associated with one particular diffusion model parameter. The task-preparation interval was
manipulated in order to assess whether the N-3 effect is related to task-specific preparation
processes. The results clearly show that it is not. These examples demonstrate that diffusion modeling
can be a useful tool for task-switching researchers.

240

Contributions

The influence of lexicon size and font characteristics on information
optimization in reading: an orthographic prediction model
investigation
Simon Schug1, Christian J. Fiebach2 & Benjamin Gagl3

Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt; 2Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt;
Center for Individual Development and Adaptive Education of Children at Risk (IDeA); Interdisciplinary Center for
Neuroscience Frankfurt; 3Department of Psychology, Goethe University Frankfurt; Center for Individual Development
and Adaptive Education of Children at Risk (IDeA)
gagl@psych.uni-frankfurt.de
1

Neurophysiology suggests energy-efficient visual processes during reading. Taking this constraint
into account, we developed and evaluated an orthographic prediction model of reading according
to which redundant perceptual input is "explained away" so that subsequent stages of word
recognition are based on an optimized representation: the orthographic prediction error (oPE). Here
we investigate the dependency of model performance (i.e., the precision of orthographic precisions)
on the size of the lexicon and font type used for the redundancy calculation in the model
implementation. Both investigations were performed using linear mixed models fitting reaction times
from a lexical decision task (35 participants; 1,600 stimuli; presented in monospaced Courier New
font). We examined model fit in multiple implementations based on systematic parameterizations of
lexicon size and font type. Lexicon sizes below 500 words resulted in an exponential increase of
model fits, while leveling out for larger lexicon sizes. For the fonts comparison, best model fit was
found for the presented font (Courier New) and a systematic decrease from fonts with comparable
(i.e. other monospaced) to dissimilar (i.e. proportionally-spaced) characteristics. Thus, top-down
prediction-based information optimization during visual word recognition depends on visual
characteristics and lexicon size.

Blind Haste: As Light Decreases, Speeding Increases
Michael Schulte-Mecklenbeck1 & Emanuel DeBellis2

University of Bern; Max Planck Institute for Human Development; 2University of St. Gallen
michael@schulte-mecklenbeck.com

1

Traffic accidents are frequently attributed to speeding, with properties of the individual driver and the
environment regarded as key contributing factors. Driving simulation studies showed that the quality
of visual conditions affects drivers’ speed perception and their driving speed. One set of findings
suggests that drivers underestimate their speed when driving under adverse visual conditions (e.g., in
fog) and therefore accelerate; other research has observed a decrease in driving speed under such
conditions. Here we examine drivers’ real-world speeding behavior and its interaction with
illuminance, a ubiquitous environmental property defined as the luminous flux incident on a surface.
Drawing on an analysis of 1.2 million vehicle movements, we show that reduced illuminance levels
are associated with an increase in speeding. Traffic planners can act on the inverse
illuminance/speeding relationship by testing the extent to which improved street lighting can
attenuate speeding and the associated accident rates.

241

Contributions

Paying to seek or avoid social interactions
Johannes Schultz, Tom Willems, Ghada Chakkour, Alexander Franke & René Hurlemann
University of Bonn, Division of Medical Psychology
johannes.schultz@ukbonn.de

Interacting with other people is a major source of happiness for most humans. However, social
interactions may result in negative social feedback. While many people spend money to seek social
interactions, socially anxious individuals may instead tend to avoid social interactions, resulting in a
loss of private and professional opportunities. To quantify the costs of pro-sociality and social
anxiety, we devised a task allowing to determine how much money participants spend to avoid or
seek a simple social interaction with a human opponent. In a sample of healthy participants, the
more anxious participants paid to avoid the interaction, while the less anxious paid to seek the
interaction. These differences were not found in a control condition with a computer as interaction
partner, demonstrating that risk aversion differences cannot explain our findings. Valence ratings of
the interaction outcomes did not significantly vary between participant groups, suggesting that
differences in outcomes valuation cannot explain the observed effects. Our results demonstrate that
tendencies towards pro-sociality and social anxiety among healthy participants are both costly. Our
experiment allows to quantify the costs of these traits and may prove useful for quantifying social
anxiety and probing the neural correlates of social decision-making.

Making inferences from bets: What would a Bayesian do?
Christin Schulze & Timothy J. Pleskac

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Rationality
cschulze@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

If you know it has been 5 minutes since the last bus came past your stop, how much longer do you
think you will have to wait for the next one? What if a friend at the stop offered you the following
bet: For the cost of 1€ he will pay you 10€, if the next bus takes more than 10 minutes to arrive?
Should and does the mere proposal of the bet alter your beliefs about when the next bus will arrive?
Prior research suggests that people’s every predictions approximate optimal Bayesian inference in
solitary settings. We develop a Bayesian belief-updating model for making inferences from bets in
social contexts, which captures how people change their beliefs based on information carried in bets
they are offered. The model assumes that, in environments in which risks and rewards are inversely
related, a bet is datum that signals the bet-upon event. We test the predictions of this model in an
experiment that asks people to judge the duration and extent of everyday phenomena. We find that
the signal carried in a bet influences people’s personal beliefs. These results provide novel insight
into how people use risk-reward relationships in social contexts.

242

Contributions

Hemispheric lateralisation does not affect motor planning in a
sequential reaching task
Christoph Schütz & Thomas Schack

Bielefeld University, Cluster of Excellence Cognitive Interaction Technology (CITEC)
christoph.schuetz@uni-bielefeld.de

In sequential reaching tasks, people persist on their former postures. The size of this hysteresis effect
is a proxy for motor planning. The cost-optimisation hypothesis predicts that the fraction of novel
planning is affected by the cognitive and the mechanical cost of the task. According to theories, the
cognitive cost of motor planning is lower in the left hemisphere, whereas the mechanical cost of
motor execution is lower in the dominant hand. We asked whether hysteresis effect sizes differed
between left- and right-handed dominant participants. To this end, we designed a sequential
reaching task. Left- and right-handed participants had to open a column of drawers with cylindrical
knobs in ascending/descending sequences, using either their left or right hand. Hand
pro/supination was measured as the dependent variable. Results showed a significant interaction of
'hand' × 'handedness', F(1,44) = 5.457, p = .024. Only the left-handed dominant participants used
different postures in their left and right hand, F(1,21) = 6.956, p = .015. More importantly, there
was no significant interaction of 'hand' × 'sequence' × 'handedness', F(1,44) < 1. This indicates that
the size of the hysteresis effect and, thus, the fraction of novel planning, was not affected by
hemispheric lateralisation.

Learning opposing visuomotor rotations in a single visuomotor map
Raphael Schween1, Jordan A Taylor2 & Mathias Hegele1

Justus-Liebig-University, Department of Psychology and Sport Science, Neuromotor Behavior Laboratory; 2Princeton
University, Department of Psychology, Intelligent Performance and Adaptation Laboratory
raphael.schween@sport.uni-giessen.de
1

People can easily switch between operating tools with very different properties. This capacity has
been investigated by studying how well individuals can learn to overcome two opposing visuomotor
perturbations, in close succession. When observed, dual learning has been viewed as reflecting the
formation and adaptation of separate visuomotor maps. Here, we examined this idea in a
visuomotor rotation task and, instead, find that dual learning is supported by local adaptation of a
single visuomotor map. Participants reached repeatedly towards a target at 90° in separate visual
workspaces while training to overcome opposing 45° visuomotor rotations, where the sign of the
rotation was tied to each workspace. Generalization of aftereffects was tested at targets from 0180°, in the absence of the rotations. Aftereffects did not differ by visual workspace. Instead,
aftereffects for both workspaces displayed generalization patterns with two opposite peaks at 45°
and 112.5°. The direction and location of the peaks could be explained by generalization of
aftereffects that center on the intended aim rather than visual target[1]. Our results suggest that
previous reports of dual adaptation may reflect local changes in a single visuomotor map, rather
than the formation of two separate maps. [1]Day et al. 2016. eNeuro 3(2):e0005-16.2016

243

Contributions

Längsschnittliche Analyse von Jugendlichen zu Ihren Einstellungen
zum Fahren und zur Automobilität
Benedikt Schweer1, Birgit Erdwien2, Guido Kattert1, Heinz Albert Stumpen1 & Christine Sutter1

Deutsche Hochschule der Polizei, Fachgebiet II.4 Verkehrswissenschaft & Verkehrspsychologie; 2Erdwien Consulting
benedikt.schweer@dhpol.de
1

Aufbauend auf einer querschnittliche Untersuchung wurde über einen Zeitraum von weiteren drei
Jahren eine längsschnittliche Analyse durchgeführt, zu der 1.108 Fragebögen ausgewertet wurden.
Diese untersuchte die Einstellung von Jugendlichen zum Fahren und zur Automobilität. Die Studie hat
die Annahme bestätigt, dass sich bereits im Jugendalter Einstellungsmuster zeigen, die auf ein
divergierendes Risikopotenzial hindeuten und somit ein konkretes Jugendlichkeitsrisiko nachweisen
können, welches sich vom Anfängerrisiko abgrenzt. Es konnte aufgezeigt werden, dass sich über
alle Erhebungszeiträume hinweg drei Gruppen von Jugendlichen herausbilden, welche ein hohes,
ein mittleres und eine geringes Potenzial aufweisen, später als Risikofahrer aufzufallen. Die Studie
konnte darüber hinaus für die Überprüfung der Annahme, dass sich risikobezogene
Einstellungsmuster im Zeitverlauf manifestieren, zwei wesentliche Punkte statistisch signifikant
belegen: zum einen existieren Gruppen von Jugendlichen, die stabil über alle Zeiträume das gleiche
Risikopotenzial aufweisen. Zum anderen existiert mit den Switchern eine Gruppe von Jugendlichen,
die sich mit ihren Einstellungen und Werten noch in der Entwicklung befinden und sich noch nicht in
einem abschließenden Risikobereich festgelegt haben. Die Erkenntnisse zeigen auf, das
Interventionsmaßnahmen nicht erst zum Zeitpunkt des Führerscheinerwerbs, sondern bereits vorher
notwendig erscheinen um das Verhalten von potentiellen Risikofahrern nachhaltig positiv zu
beeinflussen.

Do irrelevant conceptual features automatically trigger crossmodal
response retrieval?
Julien Schweitzer1, Ann-Katrin Wesslein2 & Friedrich W. Hesse1

Leibniz-Institut für Wissensmedien Tübingen; 2University of Tübingen
j.schweitzer@iwm-tuebingen.de
1

Distractor repetition can trigger the retrieval of earlier responses, even when the distractor is
presented to a different sensory modality. Evidence for such a binding of responses to conceptual
distractors comes from experiments using identification tasks where the same conceptual feature (i.e.,
stimulus identity) serves as (a) the relevant stimulus feature and (b) the distractor feature. Note that
this demonstrates distractor-response bindings for a conceptual dimension under conditions where
the conceptual dimension is task-relevant. We investigated whether distractor-response binding
effects also occur if the conceptual features are irrelevant to the task. To this end, we presented one
stimulus at a time, requiring participants to respond to a perceptual feature (elevation), while
ignoring a conceptual feature (stimulus identity). Stimuli consisted of sounds (images) of four musical
instruments that varied with regard to their pitch (spatial elevation). Stimulus presentation was
organized in prime-probe sequences which could be classified according to three independent
experimental factors: Response relation (repeated vs. changed), distractor feature relation (repeated
vs. changed), and modality relation (repeated vs. changed). The influence of these factors on
distractor-based response retrieval effects are analyzed separately for reaction times and error rates.

244

Contributions

Localization of objects across saccades based on intra-saccadic motion
streaks
Richard Schweitzer1 & Martin Rolfs2

Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience Berlin; Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Psychology;
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin School of Mind and Brain; 2Bernstein Center for Computational Neuroscience
Berlin; Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Psychology
richard.schweitzer@hu-berlin.de

1

Saccades shift objects across the retina at high velocities, yet we never perceive the blurred motion
streaks they should entail. Intra-saccadic motion signals are thought to be eliminated by saccadic
suppression, to preserve perceptual stability. Using a high-speed projection system, we investigated
the contrary hypothesis that objects can be localized across saccades based only on the intrasaccadic motion streaks they induce. Observers made horizontal saccades towards a target stimulus
(noise or Gabor patches), which moved rapidly either up or down during the saccade. Upon
saccade completion, a second, identical distractor stimulus appeared at the mirror location and
observers had to identify which of the two stimuli was the target. We compared performance to a
replay condition, in which participants’ eye movements served to simulate the retinal motion
produced by saccades.
Performance was significantly above chance level in saccade trials,
but strongly impaired compared to replay trials, unless we blanked the target when it reached its
final position to alleviate post-saccadic masking. Moreover, performance improved—even without
blanking—when motion streaks were oriented parallel to their retinal motion trajectory, inducing
more pronounced motion streaks. These results suggest that intra-saccadic motion smear might
contribute to perceptual stability instead of hindering it.

Social Probability Discounting
Diana Schwenke & Stefan Scherbaum

Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Psychology
diana.schwenke@tu-dresden.de

The tendency to devaluate probabilistic rewards has been studied by examining the behaviour of
individuals as they make their choices between certain and probabilistic options, a phenomenon that
is referred to as probability discounting. In this research, we investigated whether probabilistic
discounting benefits from dyadic decision making and identified which mechanism caused the
expected dyadic variation. Therefore, we developed a novel task in which participants executed
their choices by collecting one of two alternative coins, a certain but smaller and a probabilistic but
larger one, by navigating an avatar on a virtual grassland playing field from one movement field to
another one via keyboard presses. In the individual condition, participants moved their avatar alone
while in the dyadic condition both co-actors had to coordinate their movements in order to finally
decide on an outcome. By tracking individual keyboard presses, we were able to distinguish the
individual decision in the individual condition, the initial individual pre-decision within the dyadic
condition and the final dyadic consent. Pairwise comparison of these levels demonstrated a higher
frequency of probabilistic but larger choices and a higher quality of decisions for the final dyadic
decision compared to the individual decision and the pre-decision.

245

Contributions

Delaying motor planning can reduce reaction times
Christian Seegelke & Tobias Heed

Bielefeld University, Department of Psychology
christian.seegelke@uni-bielefeld.de

It is commonly assumed that motor planning (i.e., the process of goal selection and specification of
motor commands to achieve that goal) is completed before movement onset. Accordingly, elevated
reaction time is thought to reflect increased movement complexity. However, recent research has cast
doubt on the strict separation between movement planning and execution, putting into question the
validity of reaction time as characterizing movement plans. Here, participants bisected lines with
their dominant right hand; lines were either near or far from the hand’s starting point, to the left of or
above the hand, and line orientation was either vertical or horizontal. Participants adopted different
movement strategies: they made direct, straight reaches when initial movement direction was
perpendicular to line orientation. In contrast, they made indirect, curved reaches with a bimodal
velocity profile when initial movement direction was parallel to line orientation, so that the movement
was, again, perpendicular at the time of bisection. Importantly, reaction times were lower for the
latter kind of reaches, despite their higher complexity. We conclude that participants postponed the
incorporation of accuracy demands of the motor plan into the movement execution phase to reduce
reaction times, suggesting that these processes are not organized serially.

Data Assimilation in Experimental Psychology: A Case Study from Eye
Movements during Reading
Stefan Alexander Seelig

Potsdam University, Department of Psychology
sseelig@uni-potsdam.de

During fixations in sentence reading, information about the foveated word as well as adjacent
parafoveal words in reading direction is acquired. Whether these words are processed serially or in
parallel is subject of ongoing debate, where computational models of reading have been paramount
in elaborating and testing specific processing assumptions. Since these models are becoming more
and more complex, parameter inference using must be based on advanced data assimilation
techniques that use the maximum likelihood approach. Previously, in a single sentence reading
experiment, we used the gaze contingent boundary technique to successfully disentangle preview
difficulty and preview validity effects on a post-boundary target word n+1. However, it is still
unclear, whether the effect of preview difficulty, originating from the parafoveal preview during a
prior fixation, is due to crosstalk from parallel processing or due to serial processing combined with
forced fixations. Here we assimilate the recorded gaze data from the different experimental
conditions into the SWIFT model of saccade generation during reading, to explore how different
mechanisms can contribute to the observed effects.

246

Contributions

The Binding of auditory Attention Switches and Task Switches
Julia C Seibold, Sophie Nolden, Josefa Oberem, Janina Fels & Iring Koch
RWTH Aachen University
julia.seibold@psych.rwth-aachen.de

In an auditory switching paradigm, participants heard two simultaneously presented words: a letter
and a digit, which were each presented to one ear. In every trial, a cue indicated whether the target
stimulus would be presented to the participant’s left or right ear – indicating spatial attention switches
and repetitions. When the target stimulus was a digit, participants had to do an even-odd
discrimination on it, whereas on a target letter, a consonant-vowel discrimination was required.
Attention (ear) switches and task (letter/digit) switches occurred independently of each other. The
results revealed a reliable interaction of attention switches and task switches, indicating integrated
processing (i.e., binding of attentional set and task set). This interaction of attention switches and
task switches was reduced by an increased cue-stimulus interval and by using auditory exogenous
cues instead of visual or auditory endogenous cues. Thus, when attention switches can be prepared
for or when they are executed quasi-automatically with exogenous cues, task switches are less
affected by attention switches, which means the binding of attentional set and task set is weaker.
Hence, the interaction of attention switches and task switches represents an implicit measure of the
binding and integration of the two switching components.

Temporal preparation reduces stimulus conflict beyond an effect on
spatial attention
Verena Carola Seibold & Bettina Rolke

Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Department of Psychology
verena.seibold@uni-tuebingen.de

Recent studies suggest that temporal preparation boosts effects of selective attention, as indexed, for
instance, by smaller congruency effects in conflict tasks. Yet, it is unclear whether this beneficial
effect depends on the mediating role of spatial attention or whether it occurs beyond an effect of
temporal preparation on spatial attention. To investigate this question, we measured the effect of
temporal preparation on congruency effects in a Stroop-like task: In a manual choice-RT task,
participants responded to the color (blue or green) of a colored patch containing a color word
(“BLUE” or “GREEN”) that was either semantically congruent or incongruent to the color of the patch.
We varied the degree of temporal preparation using blocked foreperiods of different lengths (800
and 2,400 ms). To examine the mediating role of spatial attention, we varied the spatial
predictability of the colored patch: In separate blocks, the patch occurred either spatially predictable
or spatially unpredictable. Replicating previous results, we observed a smaller congruency effect in
case of a high degree of temporal preparation. Importantly, this beneficial effect was present in both
the spatially predictable and unpredictable conditions. This result suggests that temporal preparation
reduces stimulus conflict beyond an effect on spatial attention.

247

Contributions

ERP-correlates of evaluative priming underline the importance of
depth of processing and implicit affect misattribution
Laura-Effi Seib-Pfeifer & Henning Gibbons
University of Bonn, Department of Psychology
l.seib-pfeifer@uni-bonn.de

We used event-related potentials to investigate the mental processes that contribute to evaluative
priming, that is, a systematic shift of evaluative judgments about neutral targets toward the valence
of the primes. 64 Participants rated their liking of a-priori neutral Korean ideographs that were
preceded by optimally presented emotional prime words, while 64-channel EEG was recorded. We
observed a significant evaluative priming effect that was associated with a larger valence-unspecific
posterior positive slow wave (PSW) in the prime ERP, suggesting deeper prime processing.
Furthermore, depth of target processing as indicated by late range posterior target PSW was
reduced as behavioral priming increased. Thus, the depths of prime and target processing had
contrary effects on the size of the evaluative priming effect. On the other hand, smaller right-parietal
target PSW for target ideographs following negative as compared to positive primes provides strong
evidence for implicit affect misattribution as one major source of evaluative priming. In a linear
regression analysis, the two valence-unspecific ERP indices of processing depth (prime PSW, target
PSW) and the prime valence effect on target PSW were independent predictors of the size of the
behavioral priming effect. Together, the three variables accounted for 40% of the variance.

Competition between reach targets within the fast visuomotor
pathway
Luc Selen

Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour Radboud University Nijmegen
l.selen@donders.ru.nl

Within the orienting system, a fast visuomotor pathway is known to generate both express saccades
and stimulus-locked responses (SLR) in neck muscles toward a novel visual stimulus. Recently, we
revealed signatures of this fast visuomotor pathway also in human limb muscles prior to visuallyguided reaches. The SLR on limb muscle occurs within 100 ms after the onset of the visual stimulus.
However, these experiments all used a single visual stimulus to examine the SLR. Neurophysiological
studies have shown that the brain reflexively generates multiple competing motor plans in parallel
after onset of multiple visual stimuli, but this competition is often resolved before the reach. Here we
use the SLR to as a behavioral proxy for this competition process. We explicitly asked participants to
reach toward one of two possible stimuli. Behaviorally, participants showed no overt reach
averaging, but we still found evidence of reflexive motor averaging in the SLR. Thus, the motor
system initially generates an averaged reflexive EMG-burst in response to the onset of multiple visual
stimuli, and only later cognitive processes resolve the competition to generate a goal directed
voluntary movement to a single target.

248

Contributions

Validating the Attractor Dynamics Approach to Delay Discounting
Ulrike Senftleben, Martin Schoemann & Stefan Scherbaum

Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Psychology
ulrike.senftleben@tu-dresden.de

When choosing between a small but immediate and a large but delayed reward, people discount
rewards by their delay. The outcomes of such decisions are well described by discounting functions.
However, in order to understand such delay discounting behavior it is necessary to look beyond
decision outcomes and unfold the dynamics of the decision making process. Here, we validate our
recently published attractor model that describes the within- and inter-trial process dynamics of delay
discounting decision-making. In this study, we focus on inter-trial dynamics. Hence, we derive
hypotheses of the inter-trial dynamics of sequences of decisions that are unique to this type of model.
We test the model’s predictions in three experiments based on a dynamic delay discounting
computer game where we sequentially manipulate the subjective value of reward options. Our results
confirm the model’s predictions and thus provide support for the validity of our attractor model of
delay discounting.

The true size of a familiar object influences 12-month-old infants’
visual preferences
Özlem Sensoy1, Jody C Culham2 & Gudrun Schwarzer1

1
Justus-Liebig University, Department of Developmental Psychology; 2Western University, Brain and Mind Institute,
Department of Psychology
oezlem.sensoy@gmail.com

Newborns (Slater, Mattock & Braun, 1990) and young infants (Granrud, 2006) are able to perceive
objects’ physical sizes across changes in distance. However, 18- to 30-month-olds still show scale
errors such as trying to fit into a miniature car, even though they appear to distinguish true from
unusual sizes (DeLoache, Uttal & Rosengren, 2004). We asked when infants develop a notion of the
true size of an object and how this affects their visual preferences. In a preferential looking
paradigm, 65 7- and 12-month-olds were presented with highly familiar objects in their true size,
50% larger than the true size (maxi size), or 50% smaller (mini size). Dependent variables were
which item received the first look and the overall looking durations towards each object. Both 7- and
12-month-olds looked at the larger object first. However, only the 12-months-olds looked longer at
the maxi- and mini- than true-sized objects, whereas the 7-month-olds showed no difference in
looking durations. These results suggest that while even 7-month-olds can discriminate objects based
on their physical size, only by 12 months have infants developed the ability to understand the true
size of familiar objects.

249

Contributions

Handwriting, emotions and grading practices
Queralt Serra

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet, Psychology
queraltserra9@gmail.com

Background: Research has shown that handwriting style is a factor that influences the grading
process (Markham, 1976): Namely, students whose work is presented in bad handwriting
consistently receive lower grades than those with good penmanship, independent of content quality.
Additionally, grader’s state of mood, or teacher emotion, has been invoked as a factor influencing
the writing assessment process (Caswell, 2011). The current study investigates the interplay between
perceived handwriting quality, grader’s mood and grading outcome. Methods and Results: N=27
School Psychology students partook in a within-subject counterbalanced design: each participant
graded two different essays matched for content quality, written respectively in good and bad
handwriting (a pilot study appraised handwriting quality via predetermined criteria, e.g., legibility,
fluency). PANAS scores measured mood pre & post grading. Multiple regression analyses supported
the predicted direction of effects: poor handwriting quality, as well as negative mood, yielded
overall lower mean grading scores, however neither predictor was significant (resp. p=0.08 &
p=0.1). Results are discussed in relation to contributing influences on the grading process, at the
level of subjective perception and emotion.

Handlungsnotwendigkeit und spontanes Kontrastieren
Timur Sevincer1 & Gabriele Oettingen2

University of Hamburg; 2University of Hamburg; New York University
timur.sevincer@uni-hamburg.de

1

Mentale Kontrastierung einer erwünschten Zukunft mit der gegenwärtigen Realität ist eine
Selbstregulationsstrategie, die bei hohen Erfolgserwartungen hilft, zielführende Aufgaben anzugehen
(z.B. für einen Test lernen) und die erwünschte Zukunft auch tatsächlich zu erreichen. Wann aber
wenden Personen die mentale Kontrastierung spontan an? Wir vermuteten, dass sie dann mental
kontrastieren, wenn es notwendig ist zu handeln. Handlungsnotwendigkeit haben wir
operationalisiert als Dringlichkeit (Studie 1) und Zweckdienlichkeit einer Handlung (Studie 2).
Studierende, die sich vorstellen mussten, ihre Bachelorarbeit in zwei Monaten anzumelden
(dringliche Handlung) haben mit größerer Wahrscheinlichkeit mental kontrastiert als jene, die sich
vorstellten, ihre Arbeit in zwei Jahren anzumelden (nicht dringliche Handlung; Studie 1). Ebenso
haben Probanden, die einen wichtigen zwischenmenschlichen Wunsch nannten (z.B. einen Streit
beilegen), mit größerer Wahrscheinlichkeit mental kontrastiert, wenn sie die Gelegenheit bekamen,
zweckdienlich zu handeln (zwischenmenschliche Kompetenzen trainieren) als wenn ihnen die
Gelegenheit geboten wurde, nicht-zweckdienlich zu handeln (grammatikalische Kompetenzen
trainieren; Studie 2). Personen scheinen dann eher mental zu kontrastieren, wenn sie schnell und
effektiv handeln müssen, um ihren Wunsch zu realisieren. Insgesamt gab es in beiden Studien nur
wenige Probanden, die mental kontrastierten (jeweils 14%). Interventionen könnten den Gebrauch
mentaler Kontrastierung im Alltag fördern.

250

Contributions

Designing Touch Displays for Seniors: an Adaptive Approach
Avner Shahal1, Carola Trahms2 & Michael Minge1

Technische Universität Berlin, Department of Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics; 2Technische
Universität Berlin, Institute of Software Engineering and Theoretical Computer Science, Quality and Usability Lab
avshahal@gmail.com
1

Touch has become a widely accepted input modality for Man-Machine Interfaces. Touch interaction
may offer better usability and is typically related with more stimulating hedonic experiences. It would
therefore be expected, that touch be the preferable interaction modality for users who experience
limitations with other input devices (e.g., keyboards and mouse). Unfortunately, most touch devices
do not take specific user requirements into consideration. Adaptive systems might help to overcome
typical challenges. In a laboratory experiment, we investigated the benefits of different adaptive
approaches in optimizing user interaction with touch displays. Forty-eight individuals participated in
the study. As a between subject factor we compared 24 younger participants (18 to 30 years) with
24 seniors (older than 64 years). Participants solved a simple task with three different levels of
adaptation (visible, invisible, and no adaptation). Conditions were implemented as a within subject
factor in a counterbalanced presentation order. Both objective and subjective measurements were
used to evaluate users’ performance and preferences. Results show that both age groups benefit from
touch adaptation (visible or invisible), whereas the benefit is higher for seniors than for younger
adults. Visible adaptation allowed for a higher interaction speed, whereas invisible adaptation led to
more accurate inputs.

Spatial contextualization of emotional and distressing scenes:
Exploring predictions of the revised Dual Representation Theory
Sebastian Siehl1, Anika Sierk2, James Bisby3, Frauke Nees4, Herta Flor4, John King5 & Neil Burgess3

University of Heidelberg, Central Institute of Mental Health, Department of Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience;
University College London, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience; University of Mannheim, Graduate School of
Economic and Social Sciences; 2University College London, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience; Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin; 3University College London, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience; University College
London, Institute of Neurology; 4University of Heidelberg, Central Institute of Mental Health, Department of Cognitive
and Clinical Neuroscience; 5University College London, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience; University College
London, Clinical, Education and Health Psychology
sebastian.siehl@zi-mannheim.de
1

Intrusive imagery is a core symptom of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) and the revised Dual
Representation Theory (r-DRT) proposes that intrusions arise due to the up-regulation of sensory
representations and the down-regulation of contextual representations during the encoding of highly
distressing events. We investigated the effect of perspective manipulation during memory encoding
to enhance contextual processing of distressing scenes on the development of intrusive memories by
using the newly developed Spatial Trauma Encoding Paradigm (STEP). Sixty participants were asked
to watch 12 video clips containing traumatic events and to perform a topographical recognition task.
Participants were randomly assigned to one of two conditions in which they had to recall one object
from either the same viewpoint as presentation (egocentric) or a different viewpoint as from
presentation (allocentric). Participants were required to fill in a detailed electronic diary for seven
days reporting any intrusive images occurring to them. During the second session participants were
assessed on a recognition-familiarity task and a spatial and temporal pattern separation task to
determine differences in recall between the groups. We expect a decrease in intrusions and an
increase in recognition accuracy in the allocentric compared to the egocentric group due to
enhanced contextualization during memory encoding.

251

Contributions

Attentional effects on subliminal and supraliminal face priming as a
function of affective and gender congruency
Eun-Jin Sim, Marcel Harpaintner & Markus Kiefer
University of Ulm, Department of Psychiatry
eun-jin.sim@uni-ulm.de

Classical theories assume that automatic processes are autonomous and independent of higher level
cognitive influence (i.e. attention). In contrast, the attentional sensitization model of unconscious
cognition (Kiefer & Martens, 2010) suggests that even automatic processes require an attentional
enhancement via sensitization of task-relevant pathways. We investigated attentional task set effects
on face priming in a gender decision task by orthogonally varying gender congruency (prime-target:
female/male face) and affective congruency (prime-target: same/different emotional facial
expression) in the subliminal (masked primes) as well as the supraliminal (unmasked primes)
condition. Additionally, induction tasks (affective/perceptual) served to activate corresponding task
sets prior to prime presentation. While with visible primes gender congruency effects (faster reactions
for gender congruent trials) were observed in all conditions, gender congruency effects with masked
primes depended on affective congruency as a function of induction task. After the perceptual
induction task, gender congruency effects were only obtained for affectively congruent prime-target
pairings, whereas after the affective induction task gender congruency effects were observed
independent of affective congruency. This shows that with subliminal primes attentional carry-over
effects from the perceptual induction tasks influences unconscious processing of expressive facial
features thereby constraining the gender congruency effect to affectively congruent prime-target
pairings.

Competition in feature-response binding for irrelevant features
Tarini Singh & Christian Frings

University of Trier, Department of Cognitive Psychology
singh@uni-trier.de

In order to efficiently control our actions, stimuli and responses made to them are stored and
integrated in Event Files (e.g., Hommel, Muesseler, Aschersleben, & Prinz, 2001). This integration is
not restricted to relevant stimuli. Even irrelevant stimuli or features (i.e., distractors) that co-occur at
responding can be integrated (e.g., Frings, Rothermund, & Wentura, 2007). In the presence of only
one distractor, binding effects for that distractor are generally observed. In the presence of more
than one distractor feature, empirical evidence is inconsistent. The present experiments tested featureresponse binding effects for irrelevant features when more than one irrelevant feature was present. In
two experiments feature-response binding effects for three irrelevant features (colour, shape, and
location) were tested in a block-wise manner. In each block one feature was orthogonally varied to
the response while the others were held constant (Experiment 1) or always changed (Experiment 2).
Significant binding effects were observed for each of three features when the other two were held
constant (Exp. 1). However, when the other two features were varied, significant binding effects
were only observed for colour and location, but not for shape (Exp. 2).

252

Contributions

Moral bookkeeping: A cognitive model of moral judgments
Henrik Singmann1, Igor Douven2, Frank Hindriks3 & Sylvia Wenmackers4

University of Zurich; 2CNRS/Paris-Sorbonne University; 3University of Groningen; 4KU Leuven
singmann@psychologie.uzh.ch

1

There is widespread agreement among philosophers about the Mens Rea Asymmetry (MRA),
according to which praise requires intent, whereas blame does not. However, there is evidence
showing that MRA is descriptively inadequate. We hypothesize that the violations of MRA found in
the experimental literature are due to what we call “moral compositionality”, by which we mean that
people evaluate the component parts of an action separately and then reach an overall verdict by
aggregating the verdicts on the component parts. Based on this assumption we have developed a
cognitive model for moral judgments, with two additive parameters—one for outcome responsibility
and one for attitude responsibility. We show that this model is able to explain moral judgments for
Knobe-effect type vignettes for which we manipulated the outcome (positive versus negative side
effect) as well as the attitude of the actor towards the outcome. We have implemented this model in
a Bayesian framework, assuming the data to follow a Beta-distribution.

Correlation between linguistic classifications and psychological
clusters
Marietta Sionti1 & Thomas Schack2

1
"Neurocognition and Action - Biomechanics"- Research Group-CITEC Bielefeld University; 2"Neurocognition and
Action - Biomechanics"- Research Group-CITEC, Faculty of Psychology and Sport Sciences, Bielefeld, University
Research Institute for Cognition and Robotics CorLab-Bielefeld University
marietta.sionti@uni-bielefeld.de

In the current poster, we compare existing linguistic classifications (e.g. Levin, 1993; FrameNet) of
English and German motion verbs with clusters, which were based on psychological methods. More
precisely, (i) we recorded motion captured data from American and German native speakers, who
performed the action that corresponds to the verbs of the linguistic classifications, in order to analyse
them and find the patterns that coil the actions together, (ii) we recorded event related potentials to
identify the neural representation of lexical knowledge of the same verbs –as in the existing linguistic
classes. Previously, Hauk, Johnsrude and Pulvermueller (2004) demonstrated that the referential
meaning of action verbs is related to somatotopic activation. We evaluated the same result with our
verbs and motion captured clusters. (ii) we measured the structure of mental representation (Schack,
2014) to assess the action relevant organizational structures of the same verbs and actions, since
participants were asked to find the relation between words (for verbs) and avatars (for actions).

253

Contributions

Neural Analysis of Deductive and Probabilistic Reasoning
Benjamin Sklarek, Lupita Estefania Gazzo Castaneda, Dennis Dal Mas & Markus Knauff
JLU Gießen, Allgemeine Psychologie und Kognitionswissenschaft
benjamin.sklarek@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Formal logic is characterized as monotonous and content-free with only two truth-values: true or
false. Whereas, the probabilistic-approach represents a dynamic and non-monotonous logic with
considering prior-knowledge. Each approach has shown great support for its claims but studies show
an “instruction-answeringform-bias”. Deductive studies often use dichotomous answering-forms and
probabilistic studies are asking for probabilities operationalized as multilevel-scales. Therefore, the
experimental design itself might trigger the kind of reasoning. We designed a conditional reasoning
task in which one group of participants got deductive and the other group probabilistic instructions.
Both groups were presented with conditionals of different contents (abstract vs. few disablers vs.
many disablers) and in each group both a dichotomous and multilevel-scale answering-form was
available. Results show that valid inferences were approved more often under deductive than under
probabilistic instruction and the dichotomous answering-form was used more often under deductive
than under probabilistic instruction. Another important issue raises the question which neural
mechanisms underlie these behavioral results. In reasoning literature, fMRI-studies are quite rare,
show diverse results and consider almost only deductive reasoning. Therefore, we have transferred
the design of the behavioral study into a fMRI-study to elucidate the neural mechanisms of deductive
and probabilistic reasoning (results still due).

Information search in decisions from experience
Mikhail S. Spektor & Dirk U. Wulff

University of Basel, Faculty of Psychology
michael@spektor.ch

Research on decisions under risk has recently highlighted the importance of predecisional
information search. The demonstration of the so-called description-experience gap and the fact that it
cannot be entirely explained by sampling error demonstrates that learning about options through
experience might trigger processes that are different from those triggered in situations with explicitly
stated information. However, how exactly individuals explore options prior to a decision has
received little attention, and models that explicitly describe this sampling behavior are sparse. In the
present study, we aimed to qualitatively evaluate the few predictions of existing cognitive models
regarding sampling behavior and provide empirical means to guide future theory development.
Specifically, we focused on three broader classes of questions: how do individuals allocate their
samples during search? How do they decide to terminate search? And to what the degree are these
differences are intra-individually stable and inter-individually different? Using the comprehensive
database of Wulff, Mergenthaler Canseco, and Hertwig's (in press) meta-analysis, we show that
existing models fail to predict crucial aspects of sampling behavior and present qualitative results
that will serve as behavioral benchmarks for future models.

254

Contributions

Recent response conflict reduces perceptual sensitivity at the time of
distractor onset
Michael Sprengel1, Mike Wendt2 & Thomas Jacobsen1

Helmut-Schmidt-University/University of the Federal Armed Forces Hamburg; 2Medical School Hamburg
sprengem@hsu-hh.de
1

In order to unequivocally demonstrate that recent response conflict induces perceptual adjustments,
we introduced perceptual discrimination 'probes' into a temporal flanker protocol employing
coherent motion stimuli: In 11% of the trials, an only weakly coherent motion episode surprisingly
occurred instead of the fully coherent distractor motion, that preceded the fully coherent target
motion in the remaining 89% of the trials. We expected discrimination of the weakly coherent
probes to be less accurate after incongruent trials than after congruent trials. Beyond this immediate
sequence effect, we expected the penultimate trial's congurency to influence discrimination
performance in the same way. While the first hypothesis could not be substantiated, discrimination
performance did suffer when the penultimate trial was incongruent as opposed to congruent.
Fittingly, the penultimate trial's congruency also modulated the main interference effect more strongly
than the immediately preceding trial's congruency did. We speculate that this apparent retardation
is due to the difficulty of influencing the perception of basic features top-down. Clearly, our findings
do not warrant an explanation of direct sequential interference modulations in terms of attentional
adjustments. They do, however, represent the first unequivocal case of a strictly perceptual change
following so called response conict – in the expected direction.

First-language (L1) effects on second-language (L2) grammatical
gender acquisition
Simone Sprenger1 & Bergmann Christopher2

University of Groningen, Center for Language and Cognition (Semantics and Cognition Group); 2University of
Groningen, Center for Language and Cognition
s.a.sprenger@rug.nl

1

The autonomy of L1 and L2 gender systems is subject of an ongoing debate. Lemhöfer and
colleagues (Lemhöfer, Spalek & Schriefers, 2008; Lemhöfer, Schriefers & Hanique, 2010) have
explored the possibility that cross-language gender congruency effects may be due to transfer effects
during acquisition, resulting in unstable or incorrect gender representations. Here we explore effects
of gender congruency in L1 speakers of Dutch on the acquisition of L2 German gender. To test how
the differences between the Dutch and German gender system affect the acquisition of L2 German
items, we presented 22 late Dutch learners of German with 48 pictures and collected written
responses (det noun, e.g. “der Schuh”, all items were cognates) in three consecutive blocks. We
observe consistent improvement across blocks for congruent and incongruent items. However,
accuracy for incongruent items was significantly lower than for congruent ones. Also, accuracy for
German masculine targets was consistently lower than for neuter and feminine targets. Error analyses
reveal a strong bias from the L1 gender for incongruent items. We conclude that the late acquisition
of German gender by native speakers of Dutch is strongly influenced by their L1 gender system.

255

Contributions

Delayed Disengagement Effect: A comparison between a circular
search and a linear search lay-out
Maximilian Stefani & Wolfgang Mack

Universität der Bundeswehr München, Institut für Psychologie
maximilian.stefani@unibw.de

Disengagement of attention is automatically delayed in a search task when a fixated start item
shares search irrelevant features of the target item. This effect is typically found by applying an
oculomotor search paradigm by using a circular search layout. Participants had to saccade to a
peripheral circle with a particular color and to respond to the identity of the letter within it. Their
fixation was held on for a short but significant moment on the irrelevant start item if the condition
was congruent. Lead delayed disengagement back the irrelevant congruent color of the start item
initializes probably a deeper processing which results in slower reaction times. We changed the
circular search lay out into a linear search lay out which corresponds more to a real-life situation like
reading from left to right direction in German. Correspondingly, all circles were arranged
horizontally. 40 students processed 360 items in three blocks, counterbalanced between congruent
and incongruent for color and letter, and target position. We corroborated the findings with the
linear search arrangement, thus presenting further evidence for the assumption that top down
processes are involved interfering with automatic driven attentional disengagement. Participants
needed significantly more time for congruent color items.

Post-Error Slowing: Theoretical Mechanisms and Principal
Determinants
Michael B. Steinborn & Huestegge Lynn

University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology III
michael.steinborn@uni-wuerzburg.de

Responses in speeded cognitive tasks usually slow down immediately after errors, which is
traditionally explained by strategic mechanisms of evaluating and adjusting response threshold
towards more conservative behavior. Although widely accepted, this traditional view has been
challenged recently from two lines of research. First, one account alternatively argues that committing
and error evokes an orienting response (OR), resulting in slower and less accurate performance after
infrequent (but not frequent) errors (i.e., post-error RT slowing, post-error accuracy decline). Second,
it has been theorized that an error-induced OR especially affects central processing mechanisms (by
temporarily occupying routes supporting task-relevant memory retrieval) whereby it should by
particularly increased under high (vs. low) central demand. We examined this question in the context
of self-paced performance (where no intertrial separates trials from each other) with the critical
variables being demand and error-event frequency. The results of a three experiments revealed a
pattern that is entirely at odds with any account that is based on a strategic-evaluation mechanism. In
contrast, our findings indicate that responses immediately after errors suffer from a brief interruption
of task-relevant information processing triggered by search processes in memory that goes ahead
with the orienting response.

256

Contributions

Thinking about what to think – The role of meta-cognition in the
adjustment of task-unrelated thoughts
Lena Steindorf & Jan Rummel

Heidelberg University, Department of Psychology
lena.steindorf@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

Task-unrelated thoughts (TUTs) are often associated with performance decrements in demanding
tasks. During non-demanding tasks, however, people can benefit from TUTs, for example for their
creative thinking or problem solving. In fact, people are able to adjust their TUT-rates to varying
levels of task difficulty. In the present study we tested the idea of this adjustment being partially due
to meta-cognitive beliefs about task demands. That is, in expectation of a difficult task, people should
mind-wander less than in expectation of an easy task. Furthermore, less mind-wandering should result
in better task performance. We tracked people’s eye movements and periodically probed their
thoughts during a reading task after announcing an upcoming difficult comprehension test in one
and an easy test in another condition. We did not find any group differences for eye-movements,
TUTs, or test performance. However, for participants anticipating a difficult test, high difficulty
expectations (assed prior to the test) were associated with less TUTs during the reading task. Lacking
an extrinsic motivation to focus on the text, low-difficulty-expectation participants’ thoughts might
have been primarily influenced by intrinsic motivational factors like topic interest. The role of metacognition in the adjustment of task-unrelated thought is discussed.

The influence of group membership on the processing of emotional
facial actions
Miriam Steines, Tilo Kircher & Benjamin Straube

Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy
miriam.steines@staff.uni-marburg.de

Successful social interactions are based on both partners' ability to accurately recognize and
interpret each other's emotional facial actions. We hypothesize that this is achieved by a mechanism
in an extended mirror neuron system and that this process is susceptible to social factors, such as
group membership. To test this, we first employed a minimal group paradigm. For this experiment,
21 healthy German subjects completed a mock test to manipulate group membership. During the
acquisition of functional MRI data, subjects were then presented with short videos of neutral or angry
facial actions (emotion observation task) executed by members of their minimal in- or outgroup.
Furthermore, actors were of either German or Turkish descent (ethnic in-/outgroup). In an emotion
execution task, subjects also had to display angry or neutral expressions themselves. Results
demonstrate that the processing of emotional facial actions is modulated by the identity of our
interaction partner, leading to differential activations when being confronted with members of
minimal and ethnic in- or outgroups. Furthermore, results indicate that social factors, such as group
membership, might influence motor simulation processes in the right precentral gyrus, supporting the
hypothesis that mirror neuron mechanisms are involved in empathy and social cognition.

257

Contributions

Evaluating a Learning Model of Attentional Control on the Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test
Alexander Steinke1, Florian Lange2, Caroline Seer3 & Bruno Kopp1

Hannover Medical School, Department of Neurology; 2Hannover Medical School, Department of Neurology; KU
Leuven, Behavioral Engineering Research Group; 3Hannover Medical School, Department of Neurology; KU Leuven,
Department of Movement Sciences, Movement Control & Neuroplasticity Research Group
Steinke.Alexander@mh-hannover.de
1

The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) is a widely used neuropsychological test of executive
functioning. Computational modeling of latent cognitive processes offers a potential route toward
improved interpretability of test performance. A recent computational model of the WCST (Bishara et
al., Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 54(1), 5–13, 2010) describes task performance as a
function of attention shifting following reward and punishment, decision consistency, and attentional
focus. In this study, we evaluated the contribution of these proposed attentional control mechanisms
to performance on a computerized version of the WCST that has repeatedly been used in recent
experimental and psychophysiological studies. Data from 35 healthy participants served as the
empirical basis for model selection. Results indicated that performance could be modeled best when
separate free parameters for attention shifting following reward and punishment as well as an
additional decision consistency parameter were assumed. However, simulations revealed limitations
of all considered model variants in reproducing more discrete facets of performance on the
computerized WCST. We discuss the limitations of the proposed attentional control mechanisms and
suggest potential model refinements.

Cognitive control in crossmodal task switching requirements: Evidence
from crossmodal attention and modality compatibility in perceptionaction mappings
Denise N. Stephan1, Edina Fintor1, Magali E. Kreutzfeldt2 & Iring Koch1

RWTH Aachen University; 2IfADo
stephan@psych.rwth-aachen.de
1

Cognitive control enables us to respond flexibly and adaptively in order to act in a goaldirected
manner. In most everyday situations our behavior is multimodal within a multisensory environment.
Traditionally, cognitive control has been described as central and amodal, thus free of modalityspecific influences. The aim of our research was to tackle this general assumption employing the task
switching paradigm. In one series of studies we revealed that switch costs can vary substantially
depending on the specific modality mappings involved, and on whether these are modality
compatible. To explain this influence of modality compatibility, we developed the idea of betweentask crosstalk based on ideomotor backward linkages between the compatible stimulus and response
modalities as part of the task sets. In another series of studies we were interested in whether
modalityspecific influences are present when switching attention between stimuli presented in
different sensory modalities. More specifically, the task cueing paradigm was used to demonstrate
the influence of crossmodal attention switching and it was revealed that preparation, conflict
adaptation and task sets themselves are modality-specific. Taken together, the empirical findings
provide strong evidence against the idea of amodal cognitive control but implicate modality-specific
influences on cognitive control.

258

Contributions

From Simple Movements to Complex Skills: A Task-Dynamic Approach
to Motor Control
Dagmar Sternad

Northeastern University Department of Biology, Electrical and Computer Engineering and Physics
d.sternad@northeastern.edu

How do humans learn new motor skills or re-learn basic behaviors after injury, such as reaching to
drink from a glass without spilling? Much of traditional and current research on motor control has
analyzed highly simplified movements in tightly controlled experiments to permit rigorous analysis.
The challenge is to obtain rigorous insights without compromising the challenges of realistic task
performance. We have developed a task-dynamic approach that starts with analysis of how the task
constrains and enables actions and their improvement with practice. Based on mathematical
analyses of the modeled task, we study how humans develop strategies that meet complex demands.
Using three exemplary tasks, throwing a ball, rhythmically bouncing a ball, and transporting a “cup
of coffee”, we show that humans develop skill by: 1) finding error-tolerant strategies and channeling
noise into task-irrelevant dimensions, 2) exploiting solutions with dynamic stability, 3) optimizing
predictability of object dynamics. This approach is the basis for developing propositions about the
controller: We posit that complex actions are generated with dynamic primitives, modules that
overcome substantial delays and noise in the neuro-mechanical system. Using these experimental
platforms we have developed interventions that assess or help restore functional behavior in patients
with neurological disorders.

Mechanisms underlying trans-saccadic integration
Emma Elizabeth Marshall Stewart & Alexander C Schütz

Philipps-Universität Marburg, AG Allgemeine und Biologische Psychologie
emma.e.m.stewart@gmail.com

With each saccade to an object, the visual system must reconcile the low-resolution pre-saccadic
information from peripheral vision with the high-resolution post-saccadic information from foveal
vision. While humans achieve integration in a near-optimal manner, the mechanisms underlying this
process are still unclear. Two potential mechanisms that might facilitate this integration are presaccadic attention and visual working memory. It is a well-documented phenomenon that attention
pre-saccadically enhances performance at the location of an impending eye movement, and that
visual working memory can retain feature information across saccades. Given the important role of
attention and memory in enhancing perception and retaining information across saccades, we
hypothesised that these processes would also play an important role in the integration of pre- and
post-saccadic information. In a series of experiments, we investigated whether the addition of an
attentional distractor around the time of a saccade, or the addition of memory load impaired the
quality of integration across saccades. We found that our manipulations of both attention and
memory affected participants’ ability to integrate. This suggests that integration relies on both presaccadic attention and visual working memory to facilitate the integration process and ultimately
achieve perceptual stability.

259

Contributions

Der Kraftfahrer im Fokus: Nutzerzentrierte Entwicklung eines
Konzepts für autonome Fahrfunktionen
Dominique Stimm, Julia Schäfer & Arnd Engeln
Hochschule der Medien
stimm@hdm-stuttgart.de

Monotonie durch stundenlange Kolonnenfahrten auf der Autobahn erhöht die Müdigkeit und die
Gefahr von Sekundenschlaf bei Lastkraftfahrern, und stellt damit eine ernstzunehmende Ursache
schwerer Verkehrsunfälle dar (e.g., National Transportation Safety Board Safety Recommendation,
1995). Das BMWI-geförderte Projekt TANGO („Technologie für automatisiertes Fahren
nutzergerecht optimiert“) adressiert dieses Problem in Kooperation mit Bosch, MAN, Volkswagen
und der Universität Stuttgart. Zentrales Ziel des Projekts ist die Entwicklung eines Aufmerksamkeitsund Aktivitätenassistenten, der dem Kraftfahrer gezielt an seinen Fahrerzustand und das
Automatisierungslevel des Fahrzeugs angepasste Nebentätigkeiten anbietet. So kann die Monotonie
der Fahraufgabe durchbrochen und der Fahrer wachgehalten werden. Die Entwicklung folgt dabei
den Prinzipien des nutzerzentrierten Produktentwicklungsprozesses (DIN EN ISO 9241). Zunächst
wurden ethnographische Interviews und Zielgruppenbeobachtungen (Spradley, 1979) durchgeführt,
indem LKW-Fahrer auf ihrer Fahrt begleitet und im Anschluss zu ihrem Erleben befragt wurden. Die
Erkenntnisse dieser ersten Untersuchungen wurden in Form von Nutzersteckbriefen sowie daraus
abgeleiteten Key Learnings und Handlungsräumen für die Optimierung des Nutzererlebens
aufgearbeitet. Auf Basis dieser Handlungsräume wurden Ideen generiert, wie ein Aktivitäten- und
Aufmerksamkeitsassistent realisiert werden könnte. Aktuell werden erste Konzepte entwickelt, die in
iterativen Phasen evaluiert und überarbeitet werden.

Measuring driving behaviour – German validation of the Prosocial
and Aggressive Driving Inventory (PADI)
Tanja Stoll & Martin Baumann

Ulm University, Institute of Psychology and Education, Department of Human Factors
tanja.stoll@uni-ulm.de

Within the context of cooperative driving, inventories influencing factors like the willingness to
cooperate are of growing interest. Therefore, the Prosocial and Aggressive Driving Inventory (PADI)
(Harris et al., 2014) was developed to focus on the behaviour that helps avoiding traffic accidents
and increases cooperation between traffic participants. The self-report questionnaire measures
behaviour for safe (prosocial) and unsafe (aggressive) driving behaviours. The present research
investigates the validity of PADI’s German translation. The questionnaire was translated using a
forward-backwards method and was pilot tested for its translation clarity and applicability. A sample
of N= 259 (162 females and 97 males) car drivers with an average age of 28.52 years (SD = 8.65
years) was investigated. Confirmatory factor analysis confirmed the two factor structure. Internal
consistency (Cronbach a values between 0.79 and 0.84) and test-retest reliability were shown.
Multiple regression analysis was also employed to investigate connections between driving
behaviour and the Big Five personality traits. Aggressive driving behaviour was found to be linked to
Extraversion, Agreeableness, Openness to experience and Conscientiousness while prosocial driving
behaviour was found to be connected with Openness to experience and Conscientiousness.

260

Contributions

Is control of emotional disrupt valence specific?
Elisa Straub, Andrea Kiesel & David Dignath

Universität Freiburg, Institut für Psychologie, Abteilung für Allgemeine Psychologie
elisa.straub@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

Emotional information has privileged access to cognitive processing, which is problematic if
emotions interfere with the focal task (Iordan, 2013). Therefore shielding current goals against
irrelevant emotional distraction is essential for adaptive behavior. Cohen et al. (2015) observed that
emotional disrupt is reduced when participants recruit cognitive control prior to the presentation of
an emotional stimuli, using negative stimuli only. Following up on this research we asked whether the
influence of cognitive control on emotional disrupt is valence specific or not: On each trial,
participants performed an arrow version of the flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974) followed by a
color discrimination task. In between those two tasks a task-irrelevant picture was presented.
Consistent with previous research, we observed that emotional in contrast to neutral pictures
prolonged reaction times in the discrimination task, indicating an emotional disrupt effect. In two
experiments, we systematically manipulated the valence of emotional distraction and assessed how
control - as instigated by the flanker task - attenuated emotional disruption for negative (Exp.1) and
positive (Exp. 2) stimuli. An additional experiment will include both, negative and positive stimuli in
order to determine under which conditions control modulates emotional disrupt.

The processing of visual consequences of active vs. passive
movements: A tDCS study
Benjamin Straube, Rasmus Schülke, Knut Drewing, Tilo Kircher & Bianca van Kemenade
Philipps-Universität Marburg, Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie
straubeb@staff.uni-marburg.de

Perceiving the sensory consequences of one’s own actions is essential to successfully interact with the
environment. Increased temporal binding (intentional binding) as well as increased detection of
delays between action and outcome have been observed for active compared to passive movements.
Using transcranial direct stimulation (tDCS) it has been shown that left hemispheric anodal
stimulation decreased the intentional binding effect. However, whether the left hemisphere
contributes to delay detection performance between action and outcome is unknown. We
investigated polarization-dependent effects of left and right frontoparietal tDCS on detecting
temporal action–outcome discrepancies. After stimulation, participants were presented with visual
feedback with various delays after a key press. They had to report whether they detected a delay
between the key press and the feedback. In half of the trials the key press was self-initiated, in the
other half it was externally generated. A main effect of electrode location indicated highest detection
performance after frontal stimulation. Furthermore, we found that the advantage for active versus
passive conditions was larger for left hemispheric anodal stimulation. Whereas the frontal cortex is
related to delay detection performance in general, hemispheric differences seem to support the
differentiation of self-initiated versus externally generated movement consequences.

261

Contributions

Robustness of Pupil Dilation and Microsaccadic Rate in the Context of
Selection-Decision
Christoph Strauch, Lukas Greiter & Anke Huckauf
Ulm University, General Psychology
christoph.strauch@uni-ulm.de

Pupil diameter has been reported to reflect binary decision processes. A recent investigation
highlights the potential of pupil diameter to not only indicate the presence of binary decision
processes, but to even predict their outcome. In previous work, we showed that target and distractor
can be discriminated reliably in the context of letter selection. In the current two experiments, the
robustness of decision related pupil dynamics is addressed. To investigate decision related effects in
the presence of brightness changes, brightness changed for half of the trials from constant to dark in
experiment 1 and for half of the trials from constant to bright when fixating target or distractor letters
in experiment 2. A model reveals that pupil size can be employed to differentiate between target
and distractor, given that the brightness is known. Moreover, predictions can be made earlier after
letter onset in cases in which no changes in brightness occurred, compared to cases where
brightness changed. In addition, we investigated whether microsaccadic eye-movements reflect the
decision process. Implications for studies combining pupil dilation and microsaccades in the context
of decision are discussed.

Multiple levels of representation for a navigable, clustered space
Marianne Strickrodt & Tobias Meilinger

Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics
marianne.strickrodt@tuebingen.mpg.de

In contrast to spatial memory acquired in enclosed spaces (i.e., rooms), memory for navigable
spaces (e.g., buildings) is less well understood. We had subjects learn eight target objects spread
across a virtual environment, consisting of two apparent regions. Separation of regions was
triggered by visual and semantic similarity (wall colour, object categories), walking distance and
turning angle complexity (longest and most complex path at transition point), and spatio-temporal
contingency (regions learned subsequently). A subsequent pointing task revealed increased pointing
latency with increasing corridor distance to the target, and a facilitative effect of being bodily
aligned with the local corridor. Moreover, pointing to targets located within one’s current region was
faster compared to pointing to targets in the other region, and alignment with region specific
orientations enhanced pointing latency. In sum, our results indicate the formation of local and
regional memory units that manifest in the form of spatial reference frames. Our local and regional
effects give way to the interpretation that, when confronted with a complex navigable space, multiple
levels of spatial integration are stored, potentially in a hierarchical fashion. Importantly, our results
cannot be explained by concepts of exclusive local corridor units or exclusive global, all-embracing
memory units

262

Contributions

How embodied is action verb processing? Exploring the limits of
effector-specific compatibility effects
Jessica Strozyk, Daniela Ahlberg, Jana Hoffstadt, Franziska Lepp & Barbara Kaup
University of Tübingen
jessica.strozyk@uni-tuebingen.de

Theories of embodied language processing have gained support from studies showing compatibility
effects between underlying meaning dimensions of the language material and the task requirements.
For example, it has been shown that participants respond faster to hand-related words than to footrelated words when responding with the hand, while the opposite is true for responses with the foot.
In the current series of experiments, we show that this compatibility effect is restricted to certain
materials and experimental settings. While we found compatibility effects for hand- and foot-related
nouns in a Stroop-like task and a lexical decision task, compatibility effects for hand- and foot-related
action verbs were restricted to the lexical decision task. Furthermore, compatibility effects for action
verbs were reduced or even disappeared when we introduced filler items or embedded the words in
a sentence context. It thus appears that effector-specific compatibility effects are not automatic for
action verbs and only occur under task conditions that allow the participants to figure out the
underlying meaning dimension (hand/foot) of the words. These results are not compatible with a
strictly embodied view of language processing and rather support hybrid models allowing for both
modal/embodied and amodal representation formats.

Querschnittliche Analyse des Jugendlichkeitsrisiko junger
Verkehrsteilnehmer
Heinz Albert Stumpen1, Benedikt Schweer1, Guido Kattert1, Birgitt Erdwien2 & Christine Sutter1

Deutsche Hochschule der Polizei, Fachgebiet II.4 Verkehrswissenschaft & Verkehrspsychologie; 2Erdwien-Consult
benedikt.schweer@dhpol.de
1

Das Fahrverhalten und die Entwicklung junger Verkehrsteilnehmer nach Erwerb des Führerscheins
sind bereits umfassend erforscht. Bei den bisherigen Untersuchungen fanden jedoch Anfänger- und
Jugendlichkeitsrisiko keine getrennte Betrachtung. Das Anfängerrisiko, durch unsicheres
Fahrverhalten gekennzeichnet, wird nur vom Jugendlichkeitsrisiko zu differenzieren sein, wenn dieses
vor dem eigentlichen Fahranfang erhoben wird. Die Untersuchung hat sich zum Ziel gesetzt, anhand
einer ausgewählten Stichprobe von 14- bis 16-Jährigen den Zeitpunkt der Manifestierung interner
Einstellungsmuster zum verkehrsbezogenen herauszufinden. Dazu wurden in einer querschnittlichen
Untersuchung
(DVR-finanziertes
Forschungsprojekt
LAWIDA)
1.179
Jugendliche
aus
unterschiedlichen Agglomerationsräumen zu ihren Mobilitätsverhalten, ihren verkehrs- und
fahrzeugbezogenen Einstellungen und Werten sowie zu spezifischen Risikoindikatoren mittels
standardisiertem Fragebogen befragt. Hypothese dabei war, dass sich verkehrs- und
fahrzeugbezogene Einstellungen bereits lange vor dem Eintritt in die Automobilität herausbilden und
konsolidieren. Diese Einstellungen werden von den Heranwachsenden in den Übergang in die
Automobilität mit eingebracht und schlagen sich dann u.U. als spezifisches Jugendlichkeitsrisiko in
einem erhöhten Unfallrisiko bei den jungen Fahranfängern nieder. Die Ergebnisse der
Querschnittsanalyse zeigen sehr deutlich, dass das chronologische Alter kaum geeignet ist, die
unterschiedlichen Risikoausprägungen bei den Jugendlichen zu erklären. Bei der verkehrsbezogenen
Risikoaffinität von Jugendlichen sind vielmehr andere, vor allem entwicklungsbezogene und
personale Variablen geeignet, die Ausprägung potenzieller Risikobereitschaft sichtbar zu machen.

263

Contributions

Diffusion Drift Modelling of Tactile Remapping
Kenan Suljic1, José P. Ossandón2 & Tobias Heed1

University of Bielefeld, Faculty of Psychology & Sports Science; 2University of Hamburg, Biological Psychology &
Neuropsychology
tobias.heed@unni-bielefeld.de

1

Tactile stimuli can be represented in different spatial formats. For instance, a crossed right hand
(anatomical location) lies in left space (external location). When judging which limb has been
touched, humans appear to integrate these different sources of spatial information. Here, participants
received, in every trial, a tactile stimulus on one foot, and reported the touched limb by a button
press with the corresponding hand. Feet and hands were either uncrossed or crossed, creating
spatial conflict for stimulated and/or responding limbs. Both types of conflict increased reaction
times, with the strongest modulation resulting from conflict associated with the stimulated limbs. To
investigate how spatial information is combined, we utilised diffusion drift models [Ratcliff, 1978]. A
standard model [Ratcliff, 2008] cannot satisfactorily fit all experimental conditions. We are currently
exploring extended models designed to account for modelling conflict [Ulrich, 2015] and distinct
processing phases [Hübner, 2010]. Improvement of fit would provide evidence for integrative
processing during tactile remapping. In sum, in the tactile domain, even a simple limb assignment
involves processing that cannot be conceptualized as a simple diffusion drift decision process,
reflecting a higher complexity of the interplay between the multiple influences of spatial, body-related
codes in this modality.

Comparison of Object Perception in Head Mounted Display and in
Desktop Monitor for Congruent and Incongruent Environments
Erinchan Telatar1, René Reinhard2, Shah Rukh Humayoun3, Achim Ebert3 & Thomas Lachmann1
University of Kaiserslautern, Cognitive Science; 2Fraunhofer-Institut für Techno- und Wirtschaftsmathematik;
University of Kaiserslautern, Computer Graphics and HCI Group
erinchantelatar@yahoo.com

1
3

Palmer (1975) and Rémy et al. (2013) demonstrated that congruency between background
environment and object category impact response times in object perception tasks. Virtual Reality
(VR) technologies, such as head-mounted displays (HMD), offer novel approaches to present
environments and objects, which can create a strong feeling of being in the displayed environment
(presence) in VR users. It is as of yet unclear how different display technologies and experienced
subjective presence would affect object perception. In the current study, 21 young adults used both
HMD and desktop displays to enter typical beach and home environments, while evaluating their
subjective presence. In these environments, they performed object identification tasks, trying to
quickly identify typical beach or home objects. In the HMD condition, participants reported
significantly higher presence and showed tendentially quicker object identification independent of
the object-environment congruency. However, HMD usage had no impact on effects of congruency
on object identification times. The study highlights the opportunities of introducing VR technologies
for psychological experiments, but also addresses potential pitfalls in its usage.

264

Contributions

Enterprise Gamification – Investigating the Influence of Game
Mechanism on Intrinsic Motivation
Markus Thiemann1, Sandra Sülzenbrück1 & Christine Sutter2

FOM Hochschule für Oekonomie & Management, iwp Institut für Wirtschaftspsychologie; 2Deutsche Hochschule
der Polizei, Fachgebiet Verkehrswissenschaft & Verkehrspsychologie
241039@fom-net.de

1

The general focus of the study has been motivation and behaviour with regard to repetitive and
monotonous tasks. The overall pursuit was to create a setting that fosters intrinsic motivation using
Gamification. The Self-Determination Theory (SDT, Deci & Ryan, 1985) and the Job-CharacteristicModell (Hackman & Oldham, 1980) served as theoretical background. According to the SDT
autonomy and relatedness increase intrinsic motivation in learning situations. Our aim was to
systematically alter the experimental task to increase characteristics influencing autonomy and
relatedness via game mechanism. For this purpose, three groups of participants executed the same
task of sorting peas from lentils in three different experimental settings. Systematically varying game
mechanism, i.e. rewards, leader board, story, altered each setting. Based on the setting, the core
characteristics of the task (skill variety, task identity, task significance, autonomy, feedback) were
addressed differently. Using game mechanism based on competition and reward proved most useful
to stimulate the intrinsic motivation in consideration of executing a repetitive and monotonous task.
However, the significance of this effect could only be found for participants with a weak initial
motivation (state) concerning the task.

Event-related potentials in the PRP paradigm: a comparison between
young and low, intermediate, and high performing older adults
Sven Thönes, Michael Falkenstein & Patrick Darius Gajewski

Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors, Ergonomics Department
thoenes@ifado.de

Elderly people show large inter-individual variability in cognitive performance but little is known
about the underlying processes. In comparison to young participants (n = 36, mean age: 25 years),
we analyzed the performance of a large group of healthy elderly individuals (n = 138, mean age:
70 years) in the psychological refractory period (PRP) paradigm. Based on the large variability of
their performance in the dual-task situation, we clustered three groups of high, medium, and low
performing elderly. The groups differed with respect to event-related EEG potentials during task
preparation: CNV amplitudes prior to target presentation were significantly increased in high
performing elderly relative to both other groups of elderly. Moreover, larger amplitudes of frontocentral P2 and N2 in response to the second target stimulus indicate better recall and
implementation of stimulus-response mappings in high vs. medium and low performing elderly and
were comparable to young adults. Peak latencies of the P2 and N2 components did not differ
between performance groups, thus questioning explanations in terms of general information
processing speed. Our results suggest that superior performance in dual-task situations in elderly is
due to more efficient allocation of cognitive resources prior to task execution and well-preserved
response-selection mechanisms.

265

Contributions

Kognitionspsychologische Erkenntnisse zum hochautomatisierten
Fahren – eine Übersicht
Manfred Thüring, Fabienne Roche & Stefan Brandenburg

Technical University Berlin, Department of Psychology and Ergonomics
manfred.thuering@tu-berlin.de

In den letzten Jahrzehnten ermöglichten neue technische Errungenschaften einen Entwicklungsschub
hochautomatisierter Fahrzeuge, so dass diese in mittelbarer Zukunft zunehmend Teilnehmer im
Verkehrsgeschehen werden. Die Aussicht auf die baldige Verbreitung dieser Fahrzeuge führte zu
einem starken Anstieg psychologischer Forschung zum menschlichen Faktor und seinen Aktionen und
Reaktionen im Mensch-Maschine-System. Der vorliegende Beitrag fasst die Forschungsergebnisse der
letzten fünf Jahre zusammen, zeigt Schwerpunkte auf und leitet zukünftige Forschungsbedarfe ab. Er
macht deutlich, dass wesentliche Fragen der Interaktion von Mensch und Maschine in diesem
Themenfeld noch nicht bearbeitet wurden. Vor einer Episode des hochautomatisierten Fahrens ist
bspw. unklar, ob Fahrer verstehen, welche Möglichkeiten und Grenzen diese Fahrfunktionen haben.
Während einer hochautomatisierten Fahrt dürfen die Fahrer jederzeit in das Geschehen eingreifen.
Wann sie das tun und welche Folgen das für die Fahrzeugsicherheit hat, ist ebenfalls noch nicht
geklärt. Der Schwerpunkt der Forschung beschäftigte sich bisher mit der Gestaltung der
Übernahmeaufforderung und ihrer Auswirkung auf das anschließende Fahrverhalten. Diese
Untersuchungen legen z. B. nahe, dass auditive Aufforderungen zur Kontrollübernahme das
Verhalten der Fahrer positiv beeinflussen; visuelle Aufforderungen verschlechtern es. Die mittel- und
langfristigen Reaktionen von Fahrzeugführern auf die Interaktion mit hochautomatisierten Fahrzeugen
sind bisher noch kein Forschungsgegenstand gewesen. Implikationen der aufgezeigten
Forschungslücken werden diskutiert.

How graphical representation improves probability weighting in risky
choice
Kevin Tiede1, Felix Henninger2 & Benjamin E. Hilbig2

University of Konstanz, Department of Psychology; 2University of Koblenz-Landau
kevin.tiede@uni-konstanz.de

1

By representing options graphically, risky choices can be improved with regard to their accordance
with expected value maximization and appropriate weighting of small probabilities. Graphical
formats differ from descriptive formats in various features. Therefore, we investigate which features of
the representation are responsible for this improvement. In line with the sampling approach, we
hypothesize that the presentation of a large and representative sample is crucial for improved
probability weighting. In a between-subjects experiment, 530 participants made 60 choices between
two gambles. We systematically varied the properties of the presentation formats across five
conditions that cover the range from a tabular, descriptive, to a fully graphical representation. We
also went beyond the original analysis by estimating CPT parameters within each condition, with a
focus on the probability sensitivity parameter ?. As expected, probability weighting improves when
risky choices are presented as a sample. Furthermore, graphical formats (vs. descriptive formats)
reduce decision time without affecting probability weighting negatively. Our results support the
sampling approach and provide insights into the effect of representation on choices.

266

Contributions

Reorganization of Spatial Configurations During Encoding and
Memorization
Johannes David Timm & Frank Papenmeier

Eberhard Karls Universität, Department of Psychology
johannes-david.timm@uni-tuebingen.de

Single objects are not represented individually in memory but the relation to other objects
(configuration) has a strong impact. Former studies focused on encoding and recall only. We
investigated the reorganization of spatial configurations during memorization. We presented six
squares on a screen and asked the participants to memorize their locations. Afterwards the objects
disappeared during the memory phase. Participants’ task was the detection of a location change of
a single probed object during the test phase. The side of the probed object was cued in each trial
(either during encoding or memorization), thus allowing for the reorganization of spatial
configurations (if possible). During test, either a complete (all objects), a congruent (cued objects), an
incongruent (non-cued objects) or no (probed object only) configuration was shown. Location change
detection performance did not differ between the congruent-condition and complete-condition,
indicating the cue caused a complete reorganization of the spatial configuration. Participants
performed worse in the no-condition and surprisingly even worse in the incongruent-condition. There
was no interaction with time of cue indicating that participants could reorganize spatial
configurations also during memorization. We conclude that the reorganization of spatial
configurations to a subset of objects is possible during encoding and memorizing.

The cost of processing multiple feature dimensions in visual working
memory
Thomas Töllner

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
thomas.toellner@psy.lmu.de

Accumulating evidence suggests that perceptual coding is modulated by an attention-guiding
mechanism, which allocates limited ‘selection weight’ to various target-defining dimensions. While
these weight settings bias target processing pre-attentively, it remains unknown whether later
memory-related processes are also influenced by dimensional context. In this talk, I will present three
event-related-lateralization (ERL) studies designed to examine this issue. Two studies used a retro-cue
task to explore working memory (WM) access as a function of dimensional context and task set.
Results showed that both factors selectively influence WM access: whereas cross- relative to intradimensional WM targets gave rise to amplified ERLs, localization relative to identification tasks
yielded speeded ERL and reaction times. The third study used an enumeration task to investigate
whether multiple object individuation is dimensionally constrained. Behavioral enumeration
responses were fastest for identical targets, slowest for cross-dimensional targets, and of intermediate
speed for different, intra-dimensionally defined targets. EEG analyses disclosed that one source of
this response slowing was feature-based, modulating attentional selection (PCN), whereas another
source was dimension-based, associated with WM (P3b). As these dimension-specific findings are
not reconcilable with contemporary WM accounts, I will introduce an alternative view that is based
on and extends the hierarchical feature-bundle model.

267

Contributions

Level-specific attentional adjustment to proportion congruency in the
processing of hierarchical stimuli
Miriam Tomat1, Mike Wendt2 & Thomas Jacobsen1

Helmut-Schmidt-University/University of the Federal Armed Forces Hamburg, Experimental Psychology Unit;
Medical School Hamburg, Experimental Psychology Unit
tomatm@hsu-hh.de

1
2

Congruency effects in conflict tasks are larger when the proportion of congruent (PC) trials is
increased. This PC effect (i.e., PCE) has been attributed to attentional adjustment. We investigated
PC-related attentional adjustment to global and local stimulus information. Participants frequently
switched between identifying the global and the local aspects of hierarchical (Navon) stimuli while
PC varied between 75% and 25%. To control for stimulus-specific effects, we divided the stimulus set
into one subset used to manipulate PC (i.e., induction stimuli) and another subset presented with
constant frequency in both PC conditions (i.e., test stimuli). In Experiment 1, PC was manipulated in
opposing ways for the two target levels (i.e., high for one and low for the other in a given block of
trials). Level-specific PCEs occurred for both induction and test stimuli, suggesting that attention was
shifted towards the level associated with the lower PC. In Experiment 2, PCs were matched for the
two target levels. PCEs occurred for induction but very little for test stimuli. This result suggests that
low PC on both levels in the same block of trials strongly reduced attentional adjustment and
emphasizes the importance of control of stimulus-specific effects.

Target attractiveness affects unwanted sexual attention but not
gender harassment in a computer chat
Lilian Topp & Gerd Bohner

University of Bielefeld, Department of Psychology
ligreto@gmx.de

Previous research (Siebler, Sabelus, & Bohner, 2008) has focused on gender harassment (sending
sexist jokes) and found that men harassed feminist targets more than traditional targets, whereas
target's attractiveness had no effect. Additional research has studied two target behaviors – gender
harassment and unwanted sexual attention (sending sexualized remarks) – and found that men's
hostile sexism predicted both, whereas their short-term mating orientation predicted only unwanted
sexual attention (Diehl, Rees, & Bohner, 2012). In the current study, we manipulated a female
target's physical attractiveness (low vs. high) and attitude (traditional vs. feminist), and studied both
forms of sexual harassment. Male students (N = 161) could repeatedly send sexist jokes, sexualized
remarks, or nonharassing messages to a (computer-simulated) female chat partner, whose
attractiveness and attitude were manipulated through her chat profile. Independently, participant's
short-term mating orientation and hostile sexism were assessed. Results showed that greater target
attractiveness only led to more unwanted sexual attention. In contrast, target attitude had no effect on
either gender harassment or unwanted sexual attention. Furthermore, we replicated the double
dissociation of hostility and short-term mating orientation predicting different forms of sexual
harassment (Diehl et al., 2012). Implications for theory and intervention will be discussed.

268

Contributions

How to find the right app: effects of color-coded categories on visual
search on smartphones
Anna Katharina Trapp1, Niklas von Kalckreuth2, Johanna Reibke2 & Carolin Wienrich3

Technische Universität Berlin, Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics; 2Technische Universität Berlin;
Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg, Arbeitsgruppe Mensch-Technik-Systeme
anna.k.trapp@tu-berlin.de

1
3

When launching an app on a smartphone, users have to complete a complex cognitive process:
They have to remember and visualize visual characteristics of the target app (forms, colour, location),
and perform a visual search. In this contribution, we aim to test whether the process of remembering
and visualizing can be supported by a category-based colour scheme which leads to a decreased
search time. In a study (N=48), we confronted participants with a visual search on a smartphone.
The target-icon was not presented visually but by its name to include a visualization process.
Participants interacted with an icon-set in which the icon-colour was either not related to its category
(control group) or in which the icon-colour indicated the category (groups 1 and 2). Only group 2
was informed about the categorization. Group 1 was divided post-hoc into two subgroups as half of
the participants noticed the colour-category relation on their own. The analysis revealed that colorcoded categories helped participants to decrease their search time only if they were aware of the
colour-category-relation. The results show that a category-based colour scheme can enable users to a
quicker access of key-target features that help to guide attention in visual search.

We prefer what foretells over what can be foretold: On the affective
value of predictive coding
Sabrina Trapp1, Judith Goris2, Pieter Van Dessel3, Eliane Deschrijver2, Roeljan Wiersema3, Marcel
Brass2 & Senne Braem2

Department of Cognitive Psychology, Universität Hamburg; 2Department of Experimental Psychology, Ghent
University; 3Department of Experimental Clinical and Health Psychology, Ghent University
senne.braem@ugent.be
1

Many seemingly "dry" cognitive processes seem to have an affective signature. That is, recent
studies started to (re)emphasize that we often evaluate our environment and our interactions with it,
and seem to do so in an automatic manner. Some of these studies have suggested that we especially
like information more that is linked to the process of prediction. However, these studies were unclear
on whether people prefer information that can be predicted (i.e., predictable), or information that
enables to predict (i.e., predictive). Across different experiments, I will demonstrate how people
seem to like stimuli that were predictive, more than those that could be predicted. These studies add
evidence to the idea that prediction processes are not only fundamental for cognition, but contribute
to the way we evaluate our external world. Moreover, I will briefly demonstrate how some of these
new measures could allow us to better understand the preference for well-structured environments or
behaviors in autism spectrum disorder.

269

Contributions

Attentional modulation of masked semantic priming by task sets:
Influences from performed induction tasks and mere task cue
presentation
Natalie Maria Trumpp1, Heiko Reuss2, Wilfried Kunde2 & Markus Kiefer1

Ulm University, Department of Psychiatry; 2University of Würzburg, Department of Psychology
natalie.trumpp@uni-ulm.de
1

Automatic processes underlying masked semantic priming are susceptible to attentional control
influences. Conversely, task sets can be triggered automatically, even by invisible cues. In three
experiments, we compared attentional influences on masked semantic priming originating from
previously performed induction tasks with those originating from mere presentation of task cues. In
line with earlier work, masked semantic priming was consistently larger following semantic than
following perceptual induction task trials. However, the priming pattern following mere presentation
of perceptual and semantic task cues depended on task set dominance. When the task sets of the
induction task were dominant, priming was larger following a perceptual than following a semantic
cue. For weaker task sets, the priming pattern as a function of task cues was comparable to
induction task trials. This reversed priming pattern in task cue-only trials most likely reflects rapid
suppression of irrelevant dominant task sets. Across experiments, modulation of subliminal semantic
priming by cues associated with dominant task sets did not depend on awareness or format of the
task cues. This research provides insights in factors determining the dynamics of cue induced task set
activation and suppression and further elucidates mechanisms underlying attentional control of
unconscious semantic processing.

A simpler task for deeper insights: TOJ + TVA, and their application to
animal data
Jan Tünnermann & Ingrid Scharlau
Paderborn University, Psychology
jan.tuennermann@uni-paderborn.de

The underpinnings of information processing are even less accessible with behavioral means in
animals than in humans. For progress in this domain, strong and testable models are required.
Bundesen's Theory of Visual Attention, TVA, goes a long way toward understanding human visual
processing under the influence of attention. The theory explains many aspects of selective attention
with mathematical models of the low-level interactions between sensory, task-related, and decisionlevel components. TVA is typically applied to data from letter report experiments. Unfortunately, letter
report is not feasible with animal subjects. However, because of its mathematical nature, models for
other tasks can be derived from TVA. We did this for temporal-order judgments, TOJs, which are
sufficiently simple to be performed by animals. Here we report a reanalysis of TOJ data produced by
mice and show that TVA's concepts can illuminate information processing in the animal mind.

270

Contributions

Interpersonal closeness impairs the ability to recall trust decisions
Pinar Ugurlar, Michael Zürn & Ann-Christin Posten
University of Cologne, Social Cognition Center Cologne
pinar.ugurlar@uni-koeln.de

Recent research showed that interpersonal closeness may come with cognitive costs. Specifically,
closeness impairs solving decision problems including information about the self and another person
(Ugurlar & Posten, 2017). The current project extends these findings by testing whether the tendency
to trust close others more is at least partially driven by the cognitive costs of closeness. In detail, we
hypothesize that the increased cognitive costs in decisions involving close others interferes with the
processing of trust-related information and also affects decision making. In two experiments,
participants first played a sequence of Trust Games with either a close or a distant person.
Afterwards, participants recalled the amounts they had sent before. We measured recall time and
recall accuracy as proxies for cognitive costs. Consistent with our prediction, the results suggest that
interpersonal closeness impairs memory associated with trust decisions. In Experiment 1, participants
took more time to recall their decisions involving a close compared to a distant other. In Experiment
2, participants made more recall errors in decisions involving a close compared to a distant other. In
sum, these findings suggest that interpersonal closeness may create trust by merging and
subsequently confusing information about the self and close others.

The interaction between action generation and hand ownership in
action-feedback monitoring
Lukas Uhlmann

Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy
uhlmann@staff.uni-marburg.de

In order to determine whether a sensory stimulus was caused by one’s own action or someone else,
the brain needs to compare incoming sensory information with predictions about the sensory
consequences of one’s own action. In an fMRI study, we investigated whether manipulating the
identity of a part of the body influences the way in which we perceive the sensory consequences of
self-generated and externally generated actions. To this end, participants were asked to detect
delays between simple self-generated or externally generated hand movements and the movements’
visual feedback displayed on a computer screen. The visual feedback did either display the
participant’s own or someone else’s hand. Preliminary results show that delay detection performance
was worse for self-generated than for externally generated hand movements, indicating that the
perception of the former was attenuated. On the neural level, an interaction between action
generation and hand ownership was found in parietal and frontal areas, suggesting that self-referred
processing was modulated by sensory predictions that accompany the active generation of actions.
We assume that efferent signals involved in action generation processes and afferent signals
relaying the identity of a part of a body interact in order to differentiate between self and other.

271

Contributions

Task parameter influences on reach movement strategies in a gobefore-you-know action selection paradigm
Philipp Ulbrich, Mareike Spengler & Alexander Gail

Deutsches Primatenzentrum GmbH, Abteilung Kognitive Neurowissenschaften - Arbeitsgruppe Sensomotorik
pulbrich@dpz.eu

Reach trajectories in go-before-you-know choice paradigms are used to infer the latency of action
selection processes. Under initial target uncertainty, subjects typically perform movements that are
initially aimed towards the spatial midpoint between potential targets, in accordance with
neurophysiological findings of competing parallel action plans (Gallivan & Chapman, 2014).
Depending on task parameters, such as the allowed movement time window, subjects either tend to
show spatial averaging or immediately guess the final target (Wong & Haith, 2017). Here, we
systematically vary multiple task parameters to probe under which conditions averaging or guessing
occurs. Preliminary data shows that increasing reaction and movement time windows, as well as
providing the opportunity to predict the requested movement onset time via an auditory countdown
facilitate averaging. Increasing the duration of target uncertainty via manipulation of the SOA
between go-cue and the revelation of the target with the highest payoff increases the duration of
averaging, but only up to a certain time point after which subjects presumably start guessing in order
to fulfill the movement time constraints. This upper temporal bound for integrating mid-flight sensory
evidence supports the idea of an independent urgency signal triggering choice in case of belated
evidence.

Being in a good mood makes you put more /i:/s in names, but only if
you can smile
Susann Ullrich1, Ralf Rummer1, Christian Dobel2 & Gerd Fabian Volk3

Universität Erfurt, Allgemeine Psychologie und Instruktionspsychologie; 2Universität Jena, Institut für Psychologie,
Experimentelle HNO Wissenschaft; 3Universität Jena, Universitätsklinikum Klinik für Hals-, Nasen- und
Ohrenheilkunde
susann.ullrich.01@uni-erfurt.de

1

Using a name invention paradigm, we have shown that people preferably invent names containing
the vowel /i:/ when in positive mood or for positive faces, and names with /o:/ when in negative
mood or for negative faces. The Articulatory Feedback Hypothesis (Rummer et al., 2014) suggests
that neural associations between muscle movements during facial emotion display and articulation
are responsible for these effects. To test the implied causality, we ran the same experiments with
Facialis Paresis patients. As their facial nerves are paralysed, articulatory feedback should be
impaired. Compared to our studies with healthy subjects, we do not find a prevalence for /i:/ in
pseudowords created during positive mood and only a tendency towards a prevalence for /o:/
during sad mood. In the face naming paradigm, however, we find that more /i:/s are used in
names for positive faces compared to neutral and negative faces, whereas /o:/ is preferentially used
in names for negative faces. This indicates that the link between mood and facial emotion display
facilitates congruent vowel articulation, but that this connection gets impaired with a dysfunctional
facial nerve. The link between positive valence of perceived faces and vowel quality, however,
seems to be learned throughout life.

272

Contributions

Task Complexity Promotes Contributions of Processing Fluency to
Judgments of Learning
Monika Undorf

University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology
undorf@uni-mannheim.de

There is substantial evidence that the ease of retrieving, encoding, and perceiving materials while
studying affects people’s predictions of their memory performance (judgments of learning; JOLs).
Several studies, however, have found that JOLs exclusively relied on people’s explicit beliefs about
memory. The current study therefore investigated under what conditions processing fluency affects
JOLs. Specifically, four experiments tested whether difficult and complex judgment tasks promote
fluency effects on JOLs. To evaluate the impact of fluency on JOLs, participants made pre-study JOLs
that cannot possibly rely on fluency or immediate JOLs that can be based on either fluency or beliefs
about memory. Task complexity was manipulated through increasing the number of varying cues in
Experiments 1 and 2 and through increasing the number of cue levels in Experiments 3 and 4.
Results revealed that differences between pre-study JOLs and immediate JOLs in calibration and
resolution increased with task complexity. These findings support the idea that task complexity is a
moderator for processing fluency effects on JOLs.

Monitoring in cognitive control: a distinct right-lateralized prefrontal
process
Antonino Vallesi

University of Padova, Department of Neuroscience
antonino.vallesi@unipd.it

I will describe a monitoring process, which continuously checks internal and environmental
contingencies in order to optimize behavior. This process, which is computationally complementary
to another executive function called criterion setting, has also distinct spatio-temporal features.
Anatomically, monitoring tends to be right lateralized in the prefrontal cortex above and beyond the
cognitive domain or context. Temporally, it is a long-lasting, tonic process. This talk will marshal
neuroimaging, electroencephalographic and neuropsychological evidence in favor of the specificity
of this process in a variety of experimental paradigms. Moreover, I will also present some recent
EEG data that demonstrate how inter-individual variability in the efficiency of the monitoring process
can be partially predicted by frontal asymmetric biases already present at rest.

273

Contributions

Trans-saccadic learning promotes perceptual stability
Matteo Valsecchi

Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen, Abteilung Allgemeine Psychologie
matteo.valsecchi@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Every time we move our eyes the projections of objects on the retina and subsequently in visual
cortex change position. Additionally, because of the different structure of the central and peripheral
visual system, these projections are also sampled with different resolution and their geometrical
properties largely change when the eyes move. One way for the visual system to deal with the
discrepancy between the peripheral and central sensory input is to integrate pre- and post-saccadic
object representations in a single percept across saccades. The other option is to use previous
experience to establish and fine-tune a mapping mechanism that associates peripheral and central
sensory input, thus reducing the perceptual prediction error that the system faces when eye
movements occur. I show that if the target of a saccade is systematically increased or decreased in
size during saccades, the relative appearance of size in peripheral and central vision is very quickly
modulated accordingly. Despite the fact that perceptual re-calibration might emerge also when
objects move on the retina due to external motion, rather than eye movements, the ubiquity of eye
movements suggests that trans-saccadic learning gives a major contribution to the stability of at least
one geometrical visual property, i.e. size.

Orientation priming during continuous flash suppression
Christian Valuch

University of Göttingen, Department of Experimental Psychology
christian.valuch@psych.uni-goettingen.de

Continuous flash suppression (CFS) strongly reduces awareness of visual stimuli but it is unclear to
which degree fully suppressed stimuli can prime behavioral responses. We present a conservative
benchmark for behavioral priming during CFS using a simple orientation discrimination task with
Gabor gratings as primes and targets. In each trial, a prime was presented for 200 ms to the nondominant eye. The prime was tilted 45 degrees to the left or to the right and rendered invisible by
simultaneously flashing high-contrast luminance patterns at 10Hz to the dominant eye. The prime
was immediately followed by a visible target, presented to both eyes, which was congruent or
incongruent with the prime’s orientation. In 768 trials participants rapidly reported the target’s
orientation by button presses. In another 768 trials participants tried to discriminate the prime’s
orientation. Despite the primes’ non-discriminability, participants responded faster and made fewer
errors when primes and targets had a congruent rather than an incongruent orientation. However,
these priming effects were small in magnitude and only present in a subset of the participants. Using
parametric stimulus manipulations, this simple priming procedure could prove useful to shed light on
the boundary conditions of priming by non-discriminable stimuli during CFS.

274

Contributions

Predicting and perceiving multisensory consequences of one’s own
action
Bianca van Kemenade

Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy
kemenade@staff.uni-marburg.de

Predictive mechanisms play an important role in motor control and self-other distinction. According to
the forward model theory, we generate predictions about sensory action consequences using the
efference copy, which are then compared with the actual sensory feedback. Although these
predictive mechanisms have been investigated extensively, most studies have focused on unimodal
action feedback. However, actions usually generate multisensory consequences. In a series of
behavioural and neuroimaging experiments, we investigated whether the forward model creates
multisensory predictions, and aimed to unravel the underlying (neural) mechanisms. Participants
performed button presses or more complex wrist movements, and received unimodal
(visual/auditory) or bimodal (audio-visual) feedback of their action. This feedback was presented
with a variable delay, and participants were asked whether they detected a delay between action
and feedback. Furthermore, we implemented custom-made passive movement devices, with which
both active and passive movements can be made, enabling us to isolate the role of the efference
copy. We uncovered multisensory effects in the cerebellum, angular gyrus, and sensory cortices, and
a behavioural bimodal advantage specific to active conditions. Thus, both our behavioural and our
neural results point to the existence of multisensory predictive mechanisms, implemented by a
supramodal representation in the brain.

The affective nature of errors and its neurochemical modulation
Henk van Steenbergen

Institute of Psychology - Leiden University Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition (LIBC) Affect, Motivation & Action
(AMA) lab
HvanSteenbergen@fsw.leidenuniv.nl

The ability to adaptively increase cognitive control in response to cognitive challenges is crucial for
goal-directed behavior. Building on the idea that aversive arousal triggers adaptive increases in
control, I will present recent studies on the effect of errors in a Stroop-like task on facial
electromyography (fEMG) and cardiac effort. Results show that error versus correctly-performed trials
tend to increase corrugator muscle activation and cardiac contractility, suggesting that errors are
aversive and increase subsequent effort. I will then continue by discussing a possible neurochemical
mechanism that might underlie the affective modulations of post-error adaptations. Given earlier
work showing that hedonic states modulate control adaptation, we hypothesized that the mu-opioid
system might modulate adaptive control modulations. This was tested in a double-blind, placebocontrolled psychopharmacological study involving a Stroop-like task. We assessed the effect of
naltrexone, an opioid blocker most selective to the mu-opioid system, on post-error slowing.
Consistent with our hypothesis, relative to placebo, naltrexone increased post-error slowing.
Collectively, these findings support the view that errors induce aversive arousal and that this triggers
adaptive effort and control. Moreover, they reveal a novel role for the opioid system in modulating
such effects.

275

Contributions

Cross-modal priming of emotion perception in children and adults
Michael Vesker1, Daniela Bahn2, Franziska Degé1, Monika Tschense2, Christina Kauschke2 &
Gudrun Schwarzer1
Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Department of Developmental Psychology; 2Philipps-Universität Marburg,
Department of German Linguistics
michael.vesker@psychol.uni-giessen.de

1

The multi-sensory perception of emotion is a topic of much interest. However, while the integration of
information from multiple sensory modalities for the perception of emotion has been extensively
studied in adults, the literature is lacking in studies which have examined the development of this
capacity beyond infancy. Our study was thus aimed at exploring the nature of cross-modal
interference of audible speech and facial expressions during the perception of basic emotions in
older children. We tested children aged 6, 9, and 12 years, as well as adults, with a cross-modal
priming task requiring participants to categorize stimuli of one modality (either words or faces) as
being positive or negative as quickly as possible after priming with emotional stimuli from the other
modality. We found that while face-primes had little effect on categorizing words, word-primes did
show a significant effect on categorizing positive faces, increasing accuracy across all age groups in
valence-congruent trials for positive faces. The 6-year-old participants also showed the quickest
response-times during face-categorization when primed by positive words regardless of the targetface valence. Our results therefore demonstrate that audible emotion words have a strong influence
on the perception of emotional facial expressions, particularly in younger children.

Aesthetic appreciation of cultural artifacts engages additional
processes beyond a core domain-general system
Edward A Vessel1, Ilkay Isik1, Amy Belfi2, Jonathan Stahl3 & G. Gabrielle Starr4

Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics, Department of Neuroscience; 2New York University, Department of
Psychology; 3Ohio State University, Psychology; 4Pomona College
ed.vessel@ae.mpg.de

1

Individuals can be aesthetically moved by a diverse array of visual objects (paintings, mountain
vistas, etc.), and the visual features that support understanding of these objects differs by domain.
Does aesthetic appreciation of different visual domains rely on the same underlying processes?
Behaviorally, we find that the degree of shared versus individual aesthetic preference differs
systematically across domains. Preferences for faces and landscapes contained a high proportion of
shared taste, while preferences for architecture and artworks, both artifacts of human culture,
reflected strong individual differences. We then measured fMRI as 16 observers made aesthetic
judgments about architecture, natural landscapes or artwork. Previous work found that aesthetically
moving stimuli activate portions of the default-mode network (DMN), which is typically only engaged
by internally (self) directed tasks. Using multivariate pattern classification, we found that DMN
activity represents aesthetic appeal in a domain-general manner. A “searchlight” analysis revealed
additional prefrontal regions that only contained information about aesthetic appeal of either
artwork or architecture. We conclude that visual aesthetic engagement recruits a core set of domaingeneral processes, but that evaluations of cultural artifacts rely more heavily on individual aesthetic
sensibilities than those of landscapes, and also engage additional processes in prefrontal cortex.

276

Contributions

Cognitive models modulate action-perception coupling in perceptual
multistability
Peter Veto1, Marvin Uhlig1, Nikolaus F. Troje2 & Wolfgang Einhäuser1

Chemnitz University of Technology, Institute of Physics - Physics of Cognition Group; 2Queen's University,
Department of Psychology
wolfgang.einhaeuser-treyer@physik.tu-chemnitz.de
1

Theories like "common coding" suggest joint representations of action and perception, which implies
a bidirectional coupling between these domains. Effects of perception on action are self-evident.
Evidence for direct effects of action on perception arises from perceptual bistability: congruent
movements stabilize the interpretation of an ambiguous stimulus. Can cognitive processes affect such
action-to-perception transfer? Observers viewed a structure-from-motion cylinder of ambiguous motion
direction. Prior to the ambiguous stimulus, we presented unambiguous versions to induce a
mechanics model on how the cylinder connects to a rod; in the "belt-drive" condition the rod rotated
in the same direction as the cylinder, in the "gear-drive" condition in the opposing direction.
Observers rotated a manipulandum either the same way as the rod ("congruent instruction") or in the
opposing way ("incongruent instruction"). In the belt-drive condition, the congruent instruction
translates to congruency between perception and manual rotation. This condition replicates the
congruency effect: congruent movement stabilizes the percept. In the gear-drive condition, the
congruent instruction translates to *in*congruency between perception and action. Here no
congruency effect in either direction is found. This suggests that perceptual and cognitive congruency
effects nullify each other. Hence, the observers’ internal model of a machine’s operation influences
action-to-perception transfer.

Dissociating Decision Strategies in Free-Choice Tasks – A Mouse
Tracking Analysis
Diana Vogel1, Stefan Scherbaum1 & Markus Janczyk2

1
Technische Universität Dresden, Department of Psychology; 2Eberhard Karls University Tübingen, Department of
Psychology
Diana.Vogel@tu-dresden.de

Everyday life offers a variety of possible actions, out of which we choose one that fits our intended
goals. But how do these goals and actions work together in the mind? One way to pursue this
question are free-choice tasks, in which participants freely choose a response on any given trial.
However, such tasks leave participants with a substantial amount of freedom, allowing for different
response strategies. To better understand participants’ behavior in free-choice tasks, we used mouse
tracking in an ideomotor free-choice experiment, in which participants learn the connection between
an action and an effect, and subsequently have to freely choose between actions, while the effect is
presented. We identified two groups that applied different decision strategies: The first group made
the decision already at the beginning of the trial, irrespective of the yet to be presented stimulus,
while the second group decided within the trial, being affected by the stimulus more often. This
suggests that people handle free-choice tasks differently, which finds expression in a heterogeneous
response behavior and an underestimation of the examined effects. Such differences potentially limit
the reliability of inferences from free-choice experiments and should be considered in the
interpretation of their results.

277

Contributions

Besser abgelenkt als eingeschlafen? Übernahme der manuellen
Steuerung nach hochautomatisiertem Fahren
Tobias Vogelpohl & Mark Vollrath

Technische Universität Braunschweig, Department of Engineering and Traffic Psychology
t.vogelpohl@tu-braunschweig.de

Fahrer sind generell in der Lage die manuelle Steuerung nach einer Übernahmeaufforderung in
relativ kurzer Zeit zu übernehmen (M = 3 - 5 Sekunden; z.B. Gold et al., 2016). Allerdings deuten
einige Erkenntnisse darauf hin, dass kurze Übernahmezeiten nicht unbedingt für die Qualität einer
Übernahme sprechen (z.B. Louw et al., 2017). In zwei Fahrsimulator-Studien mit jeweils N = 60
Teilnehmern konnten wir zeigen, dass das Erlangen von Situationsbewusstsein nach einer
Übernahmeaufforderung länger dauern kann als die reine Deaktivierung der Automation. Diese
Effekte zeigten sich besonders deutlich bei Müdigkeit und Ablenkung der Fahrer und somit für zwei
extreme Fahrerzustände. Sowohl 90% der stark abgelenkte Fahrer als auch 90% der müden Fahrer
benötigten ca. 6-8 Sekunden um die Automation zu deaktivieren. Bei den Blicken auf den
Seitenspiegel und den Tacho waren jedoch für beide Gruppen deutliche Verzögerungen im
Vergleich zu manuellen Fahrern zu erkennen. Hierdurch war eine Absicherung der Fahrumgebung
erst nach ca. 10-15 Sekunden gewährleistet. Auf Grundlage der Ergebnisse der Studien diskutieren
wir den Begriff der Fahrerverfügbarkeit während automatisierter Fahrten und den Einfluss des
Fahrerzustands auf die Sicherheit während einer automatisierten Fahrt. Hierauf aufbauen geben wir
Hinweise für das Design von automatisiert fahrenden Fahrzeugen und definieren zukünftige
Forschungsfragen.

Abgelenkte Fußgänger: eine Beobachtungsstudie
Mark Vollrath, Kilian Heuer & Anja Katharina Huemer

Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institut für Psychologie Ingenieur- und Verkehrspsychologie
a.huemer@tu-braunschweig.de

In Deutschland wird alle sechzig Minuten ein Fußgänger schwer verletz oder gar getötet, während er
oder sie die Straße überquert. Ablenkung, insbesondere durch technische Geräte wie das
omnipräsente Handy, wird als ein Risikofaktor vermutet, da wichtige Informationen aus der Umwelt
womöglich nicht mehr wahrgenommen werden. Wie häufig Fußgänger das Handy aber tatsächlich
bei der Straßenquerung nutzen, ist gerade für Deutschland bisher unklar. In Braunschweig wurden
im Frühjahr N=3967 Fußgänger an drei verschiedenen Querungsfomen, nämlich an solchen mit
Lichtzeichenanlage, an Fußgängerüberwegen und an besonders frequentierten „freien“ Querungen
beobachtet und die von ihnen ausgeführten Nebentätigkeiten erfasst. Knapp die Hälfte der
beobachteten Fußgänger ging dabei während der Querung einer Nebentätigkeit nach, wobei
knapp 14% aller beobachteten dabei das Handy nutzten. Eine logistische Regression zeigte, dass
das Geschlecht der Fußgänger keinen Einfluss auf das Nutzungsverhalten von Handys hatte.
Teenager und junge Erwachsene waren jedoch 4,6 bzw. 2,7-mal so häufig abgelenkt wie die
mittlerer Altersgruppe und nutzen das Handy 4,0 bzw.2,9-mal so oft beim Überqueren der Straße.

278

Contributions

Do older and younger adults weigh the same bases in the same
manner to produce accurate metacognitive judgments?
Eftychia Volz-Sidiropoulou & Siegfried Gauggel

RWTH Aachen Medical Faculty, Institute of medical psychology
evolz-sidiropoulou@ukaachen.de

Research. The present study investigated whether reaction times (RT) are related to accuracy of
delayed JOLs differently for younger and older adults. Method. Using Nelson´s PRAM type of pair
associates learning task 44 younger (Mage= 24 years ± 3) and 42 older adults (Mage= 67 years ±
6) either made JOLs alone (O-JOL) or first retrieved and then made JOLs (R-JOL). RTs for making JOLs
have been recorded. Results. The JOL-accuracy was significant high younger γ=.77-.78; older γ=.71.77. In the O-JOL the regression functions relating RT to JOLs resulted in a significant linear
coefficient for older ß = -11, t = -2.3,p<.05 and younger ß = -0.02, t = -2.2,p<.05 indicating that
RT for making JOLs increased with decreasing JOLs. A significant amount of younger 21% and older
20% of JOL variance was explained by RT. Age differences were found in the R-JOL condition. In the
younger sample neither RT nor pre-JOL retrieval predicted JOL. Though, older adults relied
significantly on RT (5.3%) but mainly on pre-JOL retrieval (44%) for generating JOLs. Hierarchical
regression analyses showed pre-JOL retrieval to best predict final recall by explaining uniquely 54%
(older) and uniquely 82% (younger) of the variation in recall-scores.

Effects of eye height on the perception of interior space
Christoph von Castell, Heiko Hecht & Daniel Oberfeld

Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Institute of Psychology
castell@uni-mainz.de

In virtual environments, the physical eye height (i.e., the observer's eye position relative to the
ground plane) often does not correspond to the virtual eye height (i.e., the simulated eye position).
From an ecological point of view, eye height is an important scaling variable. What are the
consequences of dissociating proprioceptive and visual eye height information? To answer this
question, we varied the observer's physical and virtual eye height (sitting vs. standing) independently
of each other. We stereoscopically presented interior spaces with varying spatial layout on a headmounted display (HTC Vive) and used head tracking such that observers could freely explore the
rooms. Subjects judged the width, depth, and height of the presented interior spaces. Our results
show a strong effect of virtual eye height. The subjects perceived all spatial dimensions as being
larger when the simulation corresponded to a sitting as compared to a standing viewing position. In
contrast, the variation of physical eye height did not have a substantial effect. In sum, our results
indicate that observers mainly rely on visual information and do not consider proprioceptive
information when it comes to judgments of the spatial layout of virtual environments.

279

Contributions

Partial tritone substitution: More consonance by stream segregation?
Lutz von der Burchard & Christian Kaernbach

Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Institut für Psychologie
lvdb@gmx.net

Tritone substitution is a chord substitution prevalent in jazz. In a ii/II-V-I progression, the dominant
chord (V or V7) may be replaced by its tritone substitute (♭II/♭II7). In case of a partial substitution, the
dominant chord is kept in some parts of the score, while it is substituted elsewhere, typically the root
notes in the bass line. In such a sequence, the middle chord contains a bass note (♭II) that is in strong
harmonic conflict with the rest of the chord (V7). We hypothesized that this dissonance might get
resolved by auditory stream segregation, with plausible progressions occurring in each stream
(discant: descending fifth, II-V-I, bass: chromatic line II-♭II-I). To test this hypothesis, we presented II-V7
-I sequences where the dominant root note was either replaced by a tritone or a minor second. We
compared two experimental conditions supporting one-stream or two-stream interpretation. Forty-two
listeners rated sequences and individual chords for valence and correctness. We found clear-cut
effects of stream-segregation on valence and correctness ratings. For sequence ratings, we did not
find significant interaction that would support dissonance masking by stream segregation. When
comparing sequences with isolated chords, we found a significant embedding advantage
concerning correctness ratings of two-stream tritone-substitution sequences.

Smoothies – Consumer and Preference
Milena von Heydebreck & Florian Röser

University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt, Economic Psychology
florian.roeser@h-da.de

Due to the increasing mobility and flexibility in society, the out-of-house market for food and drinks
increases. Beside the typical fast-food products, people consume smoothies on their way as well. A
questionnaire was developed to find out the requirements of German smoothie consumers for the outof-house market: their taste preferences and the socio-demographic distribution. Additionally, the
willingness to pay a certain price was queried. 271 persons (from the Döhler GmbH volunteer’s
pool) started the online-questionnaire (N=233) among those were 181 Smoothie consumers – which
drink and buy Smoothies. In general, 76% stated, that they use a Smoothie as a snack for inbetween meals and woman rate Smoothies in general better than men. People between 31 and 50
years (45%) are the most frequent consumer, however, no relation could be found between (the
frequency of) commuting to work and buying smoothies. The results showed that 63% of the (asked)
people associated smoothie and healthiness. Additionally, the more often people consume
smoothies, the more often they indicate that the smoothie should replace up to two of the
recommended five portion of fruits (5 A Day). These findings will be discussed based on the actual
literature.

280

Contributions

The diffusion model can be used to analyse slow response time tasks
Mischa von Krause, Veronika Lerche, Gidon Frischkorn, Anna-Lena Schubert & Andreas Voss
University of Heidelberg, Psychologisches Institut
mischa.vonkrause@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

The diffusion model (Ratcliff, 1978) has so far mostly been used to study the cognitive processes
involved in binary decision tasks with fast reaction times (<1.5 seconds). It remains an open question
whether the model can also be applied to tasks resulting in distributions of slower reaction times.
While the diffusion model could successfully be fitted to the data from a slow figural decision task
paradigm (Lerche & Voss, in press), the generalizability of this finding is unclear. We tested a large
sample (n>100) using 18 different decision tasks. Experimentally, we manipulated task domain
(figural, numerical, and verbal) and decision speed (fast vs. slow). Analyses of model fit revealed
that the diffusion model could be fitted equally well to fast and slow decision tasks. Our results speak
in favor of an application of the diffusion model to different types of slower response time tasks.

Thinking Locally or Globally? – Trying to Overcome the Tragedy of
Personnel Evaluation
Momme von Sydow1, Niels Braus2 & Ulrike Hahn3

Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, MCMP; 2Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Institut für Psychologie,
Sozialpsychologie; 3Birkbeck College University of London, Department of Psychology
Momme.von-Sydow@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

1

If members of a group interact positively or negatively with other members of the group, their
individual performance may be dissociated from overall effects of their membership. Human resource
management should be aware of such dissociations, based for instance on altruistic or egoistic
behavior, or more generally on any behavior helping or harming the group. Correspondingly, von
Sydow & Braus (2016, 2017) and von Sydow, Braus & Hahn (2017) have investigated Two-level
Personnel-Evaluation Tasks (T-PETs), where the best overall team was not necessarily composed of the
individually best employees. Participants in the role of personnel managers in sequential learning
task learned about individual and group earnings and were assigned to repeated personnel
evaluation tasks and selection tasks. We have found that people tend to neglect group-level effects.
In Experiments 1 we here used various cover stories with local or global emphasis (emphasis on the
individual, the group or both). In Experiment 2 we focused participants on the individual level, the
group level, or on both by rating individual performance, group performance or both. These strong
manipulations yielded some improvement, but overall the results were mixed. We briefly discuss the
practical and theoretical implications of our findings.

281

Contributions

Examining the mechanisms underlying the item-specific proportion
congruent effect using the process dissociation procedure
Anne Voormann, Kerstin Dittrich, Nadine Schimpf & Karl Christoph Klauer
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Sozialpsychologie und Methodenlehre
anne.voormann@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

The item-specific proportion congruence effect (ISPC-effect) describes the variability of the size of the
Stroop effect relative to the proportion of congruent trials within a color word. Two well-known
theories provide an explanation for this effect: the theory of contingency learning (cf. Schmidt, de
Houwer, & Rothermund, 2016) and the theory of cognitive control (cf. Blais, Robidoux, Risko, &
Besner, 2007). We aimed to discriminate these theories using two experimental conditions with
ISPC-manipulation, one condition with biased contingencies, where items appeared with simply one
color word combination (e.g. the word RED always in blue), and one condition without biased
contingencies, where items appeared in several combinations. Only in the condition with biased
contingencies, contingency learning was possible. Additionally, we implemented a control condition
without ISPC-manipulation. Two studies were conducted that used different sets of neutral items. The
two theories expect different results regarding the size of the Stroop effect and the influence of the
process “word reading” in the mostly incongruent trials. To examine the influence of “word reading”,
we apply the process dissociation procedure provided by Lindsay and Jacoby (1994). Results of two
studies are discussed to conclude whether contingency learning or cognitive control primarily affects
the ISCP-effect.

Sequential Sampling Models with Variable Boundaries and NonNormal Noise: A Comparison of Six Models
Andreas Voss

Heidelberg University
andreas.voss@psychologie.uni-heidelberg.de

One of the most prominent response time models in cognitive psychology is the diffusion model:
While diffusion models have been tested exhaustively for fast perceptual tasks, it is unclear whether
the model is still valid when tasks are more difficult and thus require a longer phase of information
accumulation. For example, a collapsing of decision bounds may commence when the correct
response is not immediately obvious. Another possible modification of the diffusion model regards
“jumping to conclusion”, which cannot be modeled adequately when a constant drift and normal
noise is assumed. In this talk, I compare the fit of six different versions of diffusion models to data
from speed and accuracy conditions of simple vs. and more complex classification tasks.
Specifically, performance of a standard diffusion model was compared with three different
collapsing boundary models and two models with heavy tailed noise distributions that allow for
jumps in the decision accumulation. Across the four experimental conditions, a model with constant
thresholds but heavy tailed noise distributions (i.e. jumps in decision accumulation) fitted data best.

282

Contributions

Time course of tactile modulation in reaching
Dimitris Voudouris & Katja Fiehler

Experimental Psychology, Giessen University
dimitris.voudouris@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Tactile sensitivity on a moving limb is decreased, likely because of efference copy mechanisms that
predict and, as a result, attenuate the afferences of one’s own movement. Yet, tactile sensitivity is
particularly important when acting in a complex environment because it can provide critical signals
related to the performed action. Here, we examined how tactile sensitivity is modulated during the
course of a reaching movement. Brief vibrotactile stimuli of variable intensities that had to be
detected were presented on the participants’ right index finger shortly before or at multiple time
points during reaching to the static unseen left hand. As expected, tactile detection thresholds were
increased shortly before and during reaching compared to rest. Importantly, detection thresholds
were more strongly increased shortly before movement onset and during the latest phases of
reaching. This suggests that tactile sensitivity is flexibly modulated during the course of reaching
showing stronger suppression on the moving limb when somatosensory signals from the static, target
hand need to be preferentially processed, for instance, to plan the reaching movement or to evaluate
its outcome.

Towards an emotion-sensitive brain-computer interface for
neuroadaptive assistive technology
Mathias Vukelic

Fraunhofer-Institute for Industrial Engineering IAO
mathias.vukelic@iao.fraunhofer.de

Technology is increasingly sensitive to context, personal needs and preferences. I envision
developing adaptive human-machine interfaces to support people during their daily life. A special
focus is at identifying emotional user reactions based on brain signals during human-technology
interaction (HTI) and make them available to interactive systems. Current experimental paradigms
use established stimulus material (e.g. pictures) to induce affect and make them measurable. These
paradigms are not well-suited to study brain responses in real-world applications, e.g. during the
interaction with adaptive technologies. Thus, there is a significant lack of basic knowledge about the
underlying neurocognitive processes of affect HTI. I will present an experimental paradigm, called
AFFINDU (Adaptive System Behaviour for Affect Induction), resembling a plausible scenario of use
during HTI. This paradigm was used to study the underlying neuronal signatures of affective user
reactions towards self-initiated assistive system behaviour. I will show neuronal signatures of affect in
the time- and spectral domain from acquired electroencephalographic signals, and haemodynamic
signatures, such as measured via functional near-infrared spectroscopy. Age-related differences in
these underlying neuronal signatures will also be presented. This knowledge will help to design
powerful tools for individualized adaptive systems for future applications.

283

Contributions

Timescales of different types of saccadic adaptation
Ilja Wagner & Alexander C. Schütz

Philipps-Universität Marburg, AG Allgemeine und Biologische Psychologie (AE Sensomotorisches Lernen)
Wagneri@students.uni-marburg.de

The oculomotor system is not only capable of executing saccadic eye movements with exceeding
accuracy, but also maintains this high accuracy across the human lifespan. For this purpose, an
adaptive learning mechanism (saccadic adaptation) monitors every executed saccade and evaluates
its accuracy. If it detects movement errors, the learning mechanism uses bottom-up and top-down
signals to reestablish the accuracy of the corresponding saccade. Previous studies showed that
saccadic adaptation corrects short-term-errors, resulting from bottom-up signals, on two timescales of
learning and forgetting (Ethier, Zee, & Shadmehr, 2008). The current study asks if it corrects topdown errors (Schütz, Kerzel, & Souto, 2014) on the same timescales. In two experiments,
participants had to perform saccades to a stimulus-compound and to discriminate an element within
it. Saccadic adaptation was induced via either a bottom-up error (the whole compound moved
during the saccade) or a top-down error (the task-relevant element changed its position in the
compound between experimental phases). The results showed similarities as well as differences
between the error types. Both error-types were corrected through an initial fast and a subsequent
slower adaptation, but the initial correction had a greater magnitude for top-down errors. Forgetting
only occurred in context of top-down errors.

Limits of value-based attentional priority
Annabelle Walle, Michel D Druey & Ronald Hübner
University of Konstanz, Cognitive Psychology
annabelle.walle@uni-konstanz.de

Previous evidence suggests that value-associated stimuli attract attention even if they are taskirrelevant and cause interference. Often, learning paradigms are used in such studies to first
associate previously neutral stimuli with value. In a second phase, these stimuli then serve to assess
the effects of learned value on attention in a test task. In the present study, we examined to what
extent the learned value associations from a visual search task result in interference in a subsequent
flanker task, if the value-based, task-irrelevant features are presented spatially separated from the
flanker stimuli. Specifically, in the search task, certain colors were initially associated with high or
low monetary value. In the flanker task, the task-irrelevant flanker stimuli were then presented within
accordingly colored frames. Moreover, the flanker stimuli were either congruent, incongruent, neutral
or absent. However, we could not find any effect of value in the flanker task for any flanker type.
Our results thus suggest that the effects reported in previous studies emerge only, if the learned value
is directly bound to the distractor stimuli, but not if they are spatially separated. Possible reasons for
this discrepancy will be discussed.

284

Contributions

Aesthetic experience during reading of poetry leads to increased local
processing difficulty, but also increased global ease-of-processing
Sebastian Wallot & Winfried Menninghaus
Max Planck Institute for Empirical Aesthetics
sebastian.wallot@aesthetics.mpg.de

In the present study, two seemingly competing hypotheses about cognitive processing of poetic
language and its implications for subjective aesthetic experience were tested: While the cognitive
handicap hypothesis states that poetic language is inherently more ambiguous, and hence more
difficult to process, the cognitive fluency hypothesis suggests that cognitive ease-of-processing is
positively correlated with the emergence of aesthetic experience. To test these hypotheses, a set of
original poems that featured two of the most prominent poetic language features, rhyme and meter,
were re-written so that their manipulated versions featured only rhyme, only meter or neither of the
two. Participants read the different poem versions while their eye movements were recorded.
Additionally, participants provided subjective ratings on their aesthetic experience for each poem.
Surprisingly, the results showed evidence for both hypotheses: Poems that were rated to strongly
invoke aesthetic experiences showed higher local processing difficulty (i.e., higher total gaze
durations), but at the same time also higher global ease-of-processing (i.e., lower total reading
times). Moreover, path analysis of the subjective and objective measures suggests that the objective
text features impact subjective aesthetic experience, which in turn leads to changes of eye
movements during reading.

Warum passieren Unfälle mit ungeschützten Verkehrsteilnehmern?
Stefanie Weber1, Karen Tschech1 & Kristin Blum2

Universitätsklinikum Regensburg, AARU Verkehrsunfallforschung; 2AUDI AG, AARU Verkehrsunfallforschung
stefanie.weber@aaru.de

1

2016 hatten mit 64,0 % PKW-Nutzer den höchsten Anteil an Unfällen mit Personenschäden. 27,8 %
der Beteiligten waren ungeschützte Verkehrsteilnehmer, wobei es sich bei 14,8 % um Fahrradfahrer,
bei 7,3 % um Krafträder und bei 5,7 % um Fußgänger handelte (Statistisches Bundesamt, 2017).
Der Großteil der Unfälle wurde durch menschliches Fehlverhalten verursacht. Während die amtlichen
Unfallursachen nur eine allgemeine Einschätzung ermöglichen, erlaubt die Arbeit der
Unfallforschung eine detailliertere Betrachtung. Ein Beispiel hierfür ist die Arbeit der Audi Accident
Research Unit (AARU), einem interdisziplinärem Forschungsprojekt des Universitätsklinikums
Regensburg in Zusammenarbeit mit der AUDI AG. Anhand der 5-Step-Methode werden die von der
AARU analysierten Unfälle psychologisch bewertet. Mittlerweile wurden von der AARU über 1.200
Unfälle detailliert analysiert. Unterscheidet man dabei nicht nach der Art der Verkehrsbeteiligung,
zeigt sich, dass die Unfallursachen in mehr als der Hälfte der Unfälle in der Informationsaufnahme
liegt. Betrachtet man jedoch nur Unfälle mit ungeschützten Verkehrsteilnehmern, die in den Daten der
AARU 10% ausmachen, so verschiebt sich die Verteilung der Unfallursachen: Obwohl die häufigste
Kategorie weiterhin die Informationsaufnahme bleibt, gewinnen in diesen Unfällen die Bereiche
Informationszugang und Zielsetzung an Bedeutung. Es werden die Unfallursachenverteilungen der
analysierten AARU Unfälle in Abhängigkeit der Zusammensetzung der Unfallbeteiligten dargestellt
und miteinander verglichen.

285

Contributions

Egocentric and allocentric Simon effects in task sharing
Tom Weber, Christina Bermeitinger & Pamela Baess
University of Hildesheim, Institute for Psychology
tomweber90@googlemail.com

When dividing a simple reaction time task such as the Simon task between two participants, it has
previously been suggested that Simon effects occurred when working alongside with a co-actor in a
Go/NoGo version of the Simon paradigm, but not when no co-actor was involved. This was taken
as evidence for the so-called co-representation of the partner’s actions. However, recent studies
questioned the social nature of this co-representation account by providing evidence for Simon
Effects in a single Go/NoGo Simon task with external reference objects. In a new variant of the
Simon paradigm using stick-figure manikins, two different types of Simon effects could be
differentiated, i.e., an egocentric (based on the body-midline) and an allocentric (based on the
background object) Simon effect. In the present study, we run this variant of the Simon paradigm as
a Go/NoGo version either involving a co-actor or not. We observed an egocentric Simon effect in
the joint Go/NoGo condition, but, in contrast to previous studies, an allocentric Simon effect in the
single Go/NoGo condition. Our results offer further support for the idea that external objects (not
necessarily co-actors) foster the formation of spatial codes.

Multiasking of Young and Older Adults in Ecologically Valid Scenarios
– Virtual Car Driving
Konstantin Wechsler1, Christin Janouch2, Uwe Drescher1, Mathias Haeger1, Otmar Bock1 & Claudia
Voelcker-Rehage2
German Sport University Cologne, Physiology and Anatomy; 2Chemnitz University of Technology, Institute of
Human Movement Science and Health
k.wechsler@dshs-koeln.de
1

The ability to perform multiple tasks concurrently is omnipresent in modern society. Working
performance, leisure time, social interaction as well as everyday-activities such as car driving
challenge young and older society members equally. An immersive driving simulator was used to
compare the driving- and loading task performance of 124 (63 young (20-30y) and 61 older (6575y)) participants. We used multiple loading tasks (typing, memory, reasoning) modelled after reallife activities and embedded them into a car-following paradigm. Reaction time and correctness
(loading tasks) and velocity, lane position and collisions (driving task) were used to evaluate singleand multitasking performance. We found that compared to single-task driving, participants in the
multitask-condition drove at a lower speed, with a higher speed variability and at a more lateral lane
position. We further found that compared to young participants, older ones drove at a lower speed,
with a higher speed variability and at a more lateral lane position. In other words, old age and
multitasking had similar effects on driving, and possibly so for similar reasons, namely, a higher
cognitive demand of driving. Accordingly, only older participants increased their reaction time and
reduced their correctness when typing under multitask compared to single-task conditions.

286

Contributions

Optimizing across task congruency by stimulus selection – unless there
is a routine sequence
Christina Weckwerth1, Robert Gaschler1, Fang Zhao1, Eva Röttger2 & Hilde Haider2

Fernuniversität Hagen, Allg. Psychologie LME; 2Universität zu Köln
christina.weckwerth@fernuni-hagen.de
1

While many multitasking studies have documented costs in RT when features of the tasks mismatch
(i.e., a left stimulus or reaction in one and a right stimulus or reaction in the other task), little is known
about circumstances under which participants optimize across task congruency when they are
partially free to select (in)congruent stimuli. Participants pressed a left vs. right key to a centrally
presented “1” or “2” with their left hand. With their right hand they were to pick either the letter
presented in the left, right, upper, or lower position. Left and right position led to (in)congruency with
the other task. In the first trial of each package of four, letters at all positions were available. Options
were shrinking until new letters were presented after four trials. In Experiment 1 (N=20) participants
optimized across task congruency by selecting the letter position congruent with the response in the
two-choice task. In Experiment 2 (N=32) this was no longer the case, as single task blocks preceding
the multitasking blocks apparently established routine sequences of stimulus selection which were not
altered to optimize across task congruency.

Decision support as a possibility to improve decision-making
performance in patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease
Elisa Wegmann1, María García Arías2, Silke M. Müller1 & Matthias Brand3

University of Duisburg-Essen, General Psychology: Cognition and Center for Behavioral Addiction Research
(CeBAR); 2Universidad Francisco de Vitoria Gabinete de Orientación Educativa; 3University of Duisburg-Essen,
General Psychology: Cognition and Center for Behavioral Addiction Research (CeBAR); Erwin L. Hahn Institute for
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
elisa.wegmann@uni-due.de
1

Background and aims: Patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease (mAD) have difficulties in learning,
memory, and executive functions. These abilities are important mechanisms in decision making under
risk, which is also impaired in patients with mAD (Delazer et al., 2007). The current study addresses
the research question if decision support can compensate for mAD patients’ impairments in working
memory and executive functions when making decisions under objective risk. Methods: Fourteen
patients diagnosed with mAD but no other neuropsychological disease and 14 age-matched control
subjects performed the Game of Dice Task (GDT) measuring risky decision making three times at
intervals of 2-3 weeks. In the second investigation, participants received decision support. At the first
and third session, the original GDT was performed. Working memory and executive functions were
also assessed. Results: Patients with mAD showed impairments in executive functions and decisionmaking performance compared to controls. However, mAD-patients could improve GDT performance
with decision support and this improvement maintained in the third investigation without decision
support. Conclusions: mAD-patients were able to improve and sustain their decision-making
performance after having received decision support. It is discussed whether the integration of
supportive information in everyday decision-making situations may facilitate daily life management
of mAD patients.

287

Contributions

Mental rotation skills of expert basketball players: Identifying oncourt playing patterns
Matthias Weigelt, Karsten Schul & Daniel Memmert

University of Paderborn, Psychology and Movement Science
matthias.weigelt@uni-paderborn.de

Basketball coaches use tactic boards to instruct players on the upcoming playing pattern. This often
requires to perform mental transformations of the stimulus material. Forty-six male basketball experts
and 123 novices (59 males) were tested in the mental rotation task – basketball (MRT-B), which was
a paper-and-pencil test version similar to the original MRT by Vandenberg and Kuse (1979). Instead
of three-dimensional cubes, six different basketball playing patterns were used as stimuli. The
criterion stimulus of the 24 items was always displayed in upright orientation (i.e. basket on the top)
on the left side. In the same line, two “correct” alternatives (one stimulus rotated by 90° to the left or
right and one by 180°) and two “incorrect” alternatives (either rotated mirror-images of the criterion
stimulus or rotated images of a different playing pattern out of the set) were displayed in different
positions. The task was to identify the “correct” alternatives. Results demonstrated (1) an effect of
gender, with more items solved for male novices as compared to female novices, and (2) an effect of
expertise, with better performance for expert players than for male novices. Accordingly, basketball
experts show better mental rotation skills for sport-specific stimulus material.

Do we choose what we remember because we pay more attention to
it?
Regina Agnes Weilbächer1, Jörg Rieskamp1, Ian Krajbich2 & Sebastian Gluth1

University of Basel, Faculty of Psychology; 2Ohio State University, Department of Psychology
regina.weilbaecher@unibas.ch
1

The impact of memory processes on decision making receives growing interest. Recent research
demonstrated a bias in preferential choice: people tend to prefer remembered over forgotten options
(Gluth et al., 2015). The aim of the present study was to replicate this memory bias and to
investigate the role of attention as a potential underlying mechanism of this bias. Attention is known
to bias decisions, as people tend to prefer options that they have looked at longer (Krajbich et al.,
2010). Therefore, we predicted that attention is mediating the memory bias because people fixate
more on remembered options, and options that are fixated more are more likely to be chosen. To test
this hypothesis, we conducted a within-subject eye-tracking experiment. 40 participants learned
associations between screen locations and snacks and later decided between two options with and
without having to retrieve them from memory. We replicated the memory bias in preferential choice.
However, we did not find evidence for a mediating effect of attention on this memory bias.
Interestingly, we found that the tendency to fixate the chosen option more than the unchosen option
was amplified in decisions from memory. Our study elucidates the interplay of memory, attention,
and choice.

288

Contributions

Unconscious processing of emotions alters the “feeling” of neutral
objects: evidence from 3-4- month-old infants
Lior Weinreich1, Chiara Turati2, Chiara Filipponi2, Susanna Frigerio2 & Elena Nava2

Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences; 2University of MilanoBicocca, Department of Psychology
l.weinreich@campus.lmu.de
1

Infants are able to unconsciously process emotions very early in life, as documented by recent studies
(e.g., Jessen & Grossmann, 2015; Nava et al., 2016), and appear to be more sensitive to negative
than positive emotions. In this study, we investigated whether infants as young as 3 months of age
associate a subliminally presented negative emotion to a neutral object and modulate its perception,
as assessed through changes in skin conductance response. Methods: N = 10 infants participated in
the study. Using a simplified version of the affective priming paradigm, infants were presented with
two neutral objects that were primed with subliminally presented emotional faces (happy and angry).
We hypothesized that if infants unconsciously associated particularly the negative emotion with the
neutral object, the presentation of the object alone would elicit higher responses, as assessed with
looking times and skin conductance responses. Results: Preliminary results show that, while SCRs did
not differ between objects primed with either a happy or angry face, infants looked less to the object
primed with an angry face. This avoiding behavior suggests that infants perceived the object primed
with the angry face as less attractive than the object primed with the happy face.

An adjusted PSI-method for the stop-signal task
Lorenz Weise

RWTH Aachen, Institute für Medizinische Psychologie und Medizinische Soziologie
lweise@ukaachen.de

The stop-signal task (SST) is used in countless studies measuring response-inhibition and allows
computation of the stop-signal reaction time (SSRT), the time needed to stop a response, by varying
the delay between the go- and stop-signal (stop-signal delay, SSD). However, because of the nature
of the task, the SST can become very long, especially when including multiple conditions. To reduce
the number of trials needed for computing the SSRT, Livesey and Livesey (2017) proposed adopting
an adaptive Bayesian sampling method (PSI method; Kontsevich & Tyler, 1999) for choosing the
optimal SSD per stop-trial. Here, I use behavioral findings and SST simulation results to show that the
standard PSI method runs into trouble when subjects slow their go-responses, a common finding in
SSTs. I propose an adjusted PSI method, which continuously predicts subjects’ upcoming go-response
times in order to adapt to changing go-response speeds and still allow optimal choice of SSDs.
Simulation as well as behavioral results demonstrate the adjusted PSI method’s properties compared
to the standard PSI method and traditional methods, such as the staircase.

289

Contributions

My mistake? Enhanced error processing for commanded compared to
passively observed actions
Lisa Weller, Katharina A. Schwarz, Wilfried Kunde & Roland Pfister
University of Wuerzburg, Department of Psychology III
lisa.weller@uni-wuerzburg.de

We often ask other people to carry out specific actions for us in order to reach our goals. However,
these commanded actions sometimes go awry and goal attainment is hindered by errors of the
acting person. Here we investigated how the commanding person processes these errors of another
person. Because of the personal involvement in commanded actions, error processing during these
actions should be enhanced compared to passively observing another person’s actions. In our study,
participants either commanded another agent to perform one of four keypress responses or they
passively observed the agent responding. The agent could respond correctly or commit an error in
either case. We compared error processing of commanded and passively observed actions using
observation-related post-error slowing (oPES) as a behavioral marker and observed-error-related
negativity (oNE/oERN) and observed-error positivity (oPE) as electrophysiological markers. Whereas
error processing, as measured via the oERN, was similarly pronounced for commanded and
observed actions, commanded actions gave rise to stronger oPES and a stronger oPE. These results
suggest that enhanced monitoring is an automatic by-product of commanding another person’s
actions.

Should interpersonal distance be thought of in field-theoretical terms?
Robin Welsch, Christoph von Castell & Heiko Hecht

Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Psychologisches Institut
welsch@uni-mainz.de

Previous studies have found violations of preferred interpersonal distance to be associated with
discomfort when personal space is entered. However, the exact function of discomfort and
interpersonal distance is not yet specified. In this study, we explore the relation of interpersonal
distance with discomfort and extend previous findings concerning intrusion of personal space and
discomfort towards distances outside of personal space. For this we presented subjects with 15
interpersonal distances ranging from 40 to 250 cm and obtained verbal and manual ratings of
discomfort. Compensatory behaviors such as gaze aversion or shift in distance were controlled for.
We found discomfort and interpersonal distance to strongly depend on the size of personal space.
While discomfort rose rapidly when personal space was entered, the gradient was less steep for
distances exceeding the limits of personal space.

290

Contributions

Testing boosts grammar acquisition: Insights from the learning of Latin
morphosyntax
Katharina Wendebourg1, Birgit Öttl2, Eduard Berndt1 & Barbara Kaup1
Tübingen University; 2HU Berlin
katharina.wendebourg@uni-tuebingen.de

1

According to research on the testing effect, testing can not only be used to measure learning
performance, but also to foster learning itself. A beneficial effect of testing has been shown for
various domains, such as vocabulary learning or learning from text. In the present study, we
investigated whether testing is also beneficial for grammar acquisition. We presented adults (n = 90)
with rules of Latin morphosyntax, and asked them to identify these rules in Latin sentences
(subject/object/verb). Afterwards, learners in the testing group saw Latin sentences that temporarily
contained a blank that was to be filled-in mentally before the complete sentence appeared on the
screen. For learners in the restudy group, the sentences did not contain a blank. Learning
performance was assessed with fill-in-the-blank tests, 5 minutes and 48 hours after the testing/restudy
phase. Results revealed a beneficial effect of testing. Interestingly, in contrast to studies observing
testing effects in other domains, we observed a beneficial effect already in the immediate posttest,
suggesting that differences between the two groups in our study do not mainly reflect differences in
the forgetting rate of the rules.

Probing attentional adjustment
Mike Wendt

Medical School Hamburg, Faculty of Human Sciences
mike.wendt@medicalschool-hamburg.de

Attentional adjustment to varying context conditions is widely considered a means of executive
control. Such adjustment is often inferred from modulations of congruency effects, that is, from
variations in the size of the performance difference when target and distractor stimuli are associated
with same response (i.e., congruent condition) compared to different responses (i.e., incongruent
condition). This method has yielded various confounds with the sequence or the frequency of simple
or abstract stimulus features or stimulus-response contingencies, allowing for alternative, nonattentional accounts. I will review methodological advances aimed at eliminating possible
confounds, focusing particularly on a probe task approach, which is based on intermixing trials of a
different task, designed to be sensitive to the assumed adjustment process.

291

Contributions

Insights into embodied language: neural activity during body-related
and emotional word processing
Christine Wiebking1, Christina Ralph-Nearman2 & Cornelia Herbert1

Ulm University, Applied Emotion and Motivation Research; 2University of Nottingham, School of Psychology
christine.wiebking@uni-ulm.de

1

Investigating neural activity during processing and evaluation of abstract stimuli like words is a topic
of sustained interest in experimental psychology and cognitive neuroscience. Embodiment theories
have proposed a close relationship between word processing and sensory, sensorimotor and
affective processes in the brain. Whilst previous neuroimaging studies targeted brain regions
involved in the processing of action or emotional words, the aim of the present functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) study was to explore category-specific and category-unspecific semantic
processing effects. Testing for modality-specific 'embodied' word processing (e.g., involvement of
sensorimotor cortex in the appraisal of body-related words) and modality-unspecific semantic word
processing, the influence of type of language, emotional and body-related content was investigated.
Echo planar images with BOLD contrast were acquired (3-Tesla Siemens Magnetom Prisma) in
healthy participants. The paradigm included positive/negative emotional vs. neutral words and
body-related words (e.g., leg, arm) in German (first) and English (second) language. Preliminary
results suggest differential neural activity in brain regions like the insula (including left and right
posterior/anterior insula), medial brain regions (not belonging to semantic converging zones) and
language-related temporal brain regions when processing emotional and body-related words in
German and English.

Social Inhibition of Return in the interaction between Humans and
Virtual Agents
Carolin Wienrich1, Felix Kretschmer2, Richard Gross2 & Gisela Müller-Plath2

University Würzburg, Institut Human-Computer-Media Team for Human-Technique-Systems; 2Technische Universität
Berlin, Institute for Psychology and Ergonomics, Chair for Methology and New Media
carolin.wienrich@uni-wuerzburg.de

1

Introduction. The well-known inhibition of return effect (IOR) does not only occur intrasubjectively
(within-participant IOR) but is also found with one participant observing the response of another
(between-participant IOR; Welsh et al., 2005). Skarratt, Cole and Kingstone (2010) coined the term
social inhibition of return (sIOR), because they found that only a real conspecific could induce the
inhibition effect in another person, whereas an animated conspecific could not. However, their
animated participant was displayed as a video on a 2D-TV-screen, i.e. weakly immersive. In contrast
thereto, the present study investigated the impact of a stronger immersive virtual partner on the sIOR
phenomenon expecting the typical reaction time costs. Method. 22 participants conducted a mixedreality experiment. Participants indicated their response on a real reaction table, which was exactly
emulated in virtual reality. The interaction with the animated partner occurred in virtual reality. Prior
to the experiment, the movements of the virtual agent were captured by motion tracking. Results. The
results revealed a significant cost effect regarding reaction times (t(21) = 3,390, p = 0,001) and
hence confirmed that a virtual partner can induce sIOR. Reasons for different results and implications
for the design of interactions with animated conspecifics are discussed. Literatur Skarratt, P. A., Cole,
G. G., & Kingstone, A. (2010). Social inhibition of return. Acta psychologica, 134(1), 48-54.
Welsh, T. N., Elliott, D., Anson, J. G., Dhillon, V., Weeks, D. J., Lyons, J. L., & Chua, R. (2005).
Does Joe influence Fred's action?: Inhibition of return across different nervous systems. Neuroscience
letters, 385(2), 99-104.

292

Contributions

Which information is diagnostic for efficient real-world scene
categorization?
Verena Willenbockel1, Sandro Wiesmann1, Frédéric Gosselin2 & Melissa L.-H. Võ1

Goethe University Frankfurt, Department of Psychology; 2Département de Psychologie, Université de Montréal
willenbockel@psych.uni-frankfurt.de

1

Real-world scenes contain a wealth of information potentially useful for categorization. Which
information subsets do we rely on for quickly and accurately categorizing scenes at the basic level?
Using the SF Bubbles technique, we investigated which spatial frequencies (SFs) observers use for
fast and accurate categorization of indoor scenes (Experiment 1) and natural outdoor scenes
(Experiment 2). In each experiment, observers viewed 800 images from four categories in random
order. Images were SF filtered using randomly distributed Gaussian "bubbles" and displayed until
observers’ response. Observers’ task was to press the spacebar as soon as they recognized the
scene category, and upon stimulus offset, press the respective key for the correct category. Multiple
linear regressions on the transformed RTs from the spacebar press and the respective filters revealed
two SF bands: in Experiment 1, SFs around 3 cycles/image (0.50 cycles/degree) and around 28
cycles/image (4.67 cycles/degree) attained significance; in Experiment 2, SFs around 2
cycles/image (0.33 cycles/degree) and around 26 cycles/image (4.33 cycles/degree) were
significant. Second-order analyses indicated that these significant “low” and “high” SFs were used
conjunctively. Our results demonstrate that people utilize a combination of coarse and fine
information for efficiently categorizing both indoor and outdoor scenes.

A new critical test for discrete-state models of change detection based
on likelihood-ratios
Samuel Winiger1, Henrik Singmann1, David Kellen2 & Klaus Oberauser1

University of Zurich, Department of Psychology, Cognition Unit; 2Syracruse University
s.winiger@psychologie.uzh.ch

1

There is an ongoing debate whether visual working memory is best described by continuous models
(i.e., resource models) or discrete-state models (i.e., slot models). The goal of this study is to test a
core aspect of discrete-state models for confidence-rating responses. Discrete-state models predict
that the sign of the log-likelihood ratio of the responses switches from positive to negative at exactly
the binary point of the confidence rating scale (i.e., the point between 'unsure change' and 'unsure
same'). In a change detection task with an 8-point confidence rating scale we manipulated the base
rates of change trials (25% change trials and 75% change trials) and measured the point where the
log-likelihood sign switches. Two experiments were conducted to test this prediction. In Experiment 1
we used non-intrusion change trials. In Experiment 2 we used intrusion change trials (i.e., the test
color of change trials was present in the learning set, but on a different item). We test the predictions
on the posterior predictive distribution simulated from a hierarchical-Bayesian instantiation of the
discrete-state model. Results provide evidence against the prediction of the discrete-state model in
both experiments.

293

Contributions

Transfer is possible – Drivers’ benefit from a multi stage collision
warning
Susann Winkler, Juela Kazazi & Mark Vollrath

Technische Universität Braunschweig, Institut für Psychologie, Abt. Ingenieur- und Verkehrspsychologie
susann.winkler@tu-bs.de

Driver assistance can increase traffic safety. As safety-critical situations can be diverse, integrated
adaptive warnings (like a multi stage collision warning) need to be developed and examined in a
variety of situations over time. This driving simulator experiment investigated a multi stage collision
warning in diverse critical situations instead of one very specific use case. It adapts its output
according to the drivers’ behavior and comprises two warning stages (W1 – warning for moderate
deceleration in less critical situations and W2 – urgent warning for strong and fast brake reactions in
more critical situations). The driving behavior and subjective evaluations of twenty-four participants
were measured in order to analyze whether drivers benefit from the assistance when allowed
practice with it in partially repetitive trials of various critical situations (including a baseline without
assistance, a learning phase with assistance and a transfer drive). The well accepted multi stage
collision warning system can be recommended as beneficial in various critical situations. Drivers
learn how fast and strong to brake with the assistance and can apply the gained knowledge from
the learning phase to various new situations (transfer).

Valence-based asymmetries in attentional bias towards emotional
faces in the general population
Benedikt Emanuel Wirth & Dirk Wentura
Saarland University, Department of Psychology
benedikt.wirth@uni-saarland.de

In three dot-probe experiments, we investigated whether emotional faces capture attention in
unselected (i.e., non-anxious) samples. In Experiment 1, we conducted a dot-probe task with
photographic angry and neutral face cues. The target display always contained a distractor and the
target, which had to be selected and categorised. Two types of target stimuli were employed,
socially meaningful targets (schematic faces) versus socially meaningless targets (scrambled
schematic faces). Participants showed a reliable attentional bias towards angry face cues only when
they were classifying socially meaningful targets. In Experiment 2, we investigated whether
attentional bias towards happy faces is also contingent on socially meaningful target stimuli. We
found an attentional bias towards happy faces that was, however, not moderated by the social
characteristics of the target stimuli. To rule out the possibility that low-level stimulus confounds caused
the attentional bias in Experiment 2, we conducted Experiment 3 employing inverted happy (and
neutral) face cues. No attentional bias towards inverted happy face cues occurred. Thus, it seems
that the general population shows an unconditional attentional bias towards happy faces, but that
attentional bias towards angry faces is contingent on the activation of a social processing mode due
to current task demands.

294

Contributions

How Not to Fall for the White Bear: Flexible Control of Negation
Processing
Robert Wirth, Wilfried Kunde & Roland Pfister
University of Würzburg
Robert.Wirth@uni-wuerzburg.de

Processing negated mental representations comes with a price: Negations are harder to resolve than
affirmative statements, and they may invoke ironic effects, producing the exact opposite of the
intended outcome. These negation effects also behave ironically when subjected to high- frequency
training, when they are confronted often, the difficulty to process negations strangely increases.
Here, we show that negation effects can be mitigated under certain circumstances. Based on conflict
adaptation models, we hypothesized that negation effects diminish when two criteria are met:
negations have to be resolved not only frequently, but also just recently. We confirmed this
prediction by using an innovative, two-dimensional finger tracking design, in which we measured the
influence of the original semantic content during negation processing. Negation effects were present
throughout the experiment, but drastically reduced when a high frequency and recency were able to
work in concert. The combined influence of frequency and recency thus seems to be the most
successful and promising attempt to mitigate ironic negation effects on overt behavior.

Cognitive load influences performance, speech and physiological
parameters in a multimodal dual-task setting
Maria Wirzberger1, Robert Herms2, Shirin Esmaeili Bijarsari1, Günter Daniel Rey1 & Maximilian Eibl2
TU Chemnitz, Psychology of Learning with Digital Media; 2TU Chemnitz, Media Informatics
maria.wirzberger@phil.tu-chemnitz.de

1

The prominent Cognitive Load Theory postulates distinct sources that contribute to overall cognitive
resource demands in instructional settings. Based on this theoretical framework, the study provided
insights into the progression and interaction of structural and process-related facets of cognitive load
in a dual-task scenario. The tested sample of 123 student participants (M = 22.67 years, SD = 3.55,
76.42% female) learned easy or difficult combinations of geometrical symbols in a visual-motor
primary task while memorizing five-digit number sequences from an auditory-verbal secondary task.
Task complexity, representing intrinsic cognitive load, was manipulated by the number of symbols
that formed a combination. Secondary task demands were regarded as situational constraints
related to extraneous cognitive load. Participants’ learning performance within each trial provided
an assessment of schema acquisition, attached to germane cognitive load. In addition to
participants’ performance, relevant speech and physiological parameters were recorded
continuously to monitor changes in cognitive resource demands. Results revealed increasing
progressions of both primary and secondary task performance over the trials. Significant decreases
in speech and physiological parameters indicate a reduction in the overall level of cognitive load
with task progression. Theoretical and practical implications of the observed result pattern are
discussed within the talk.

295

Contributions

Striking individual differences in gloss perception
Christoph Witzel

Allgemeine Psychologie, Justus-Liebig-Universität
cwitzel@daad-alumni.de

Two new photos surged a buzz in the social media because the legs and the sandwiches shown in
the photos were described as extremely glossy by some and as completely matte by others. We
conducted two online surveys and an experiment in the laboratory to measure gloss estimations for
the two photos and compared them to individual differences in the perception of other objects.
Results established systematic individual differences in the gloss perception of the two photos that
were related to age, but neither to gloss perception of other objects nor to colour and gloss
perception of #theDress. Those individual differences depended on whether observers attributed the
white areas on the legs and sandwiches to light reflections or to substances, such as paint or
powder. When images were presented in a (20 times) larger size, observers rated the objects as
less glossy. This observation highlights the role of fine-grained texture for gloss perception and it also
explains the correlation with age. After observers had seen the larger versions of the images their
gloss ratings remained low for the small images, suggesting an effect of insight. Taken together,
these photos provide a new approach to study the determinants of perceived gloss.

Untersuchung expliziter und impliziter Kommunikationsformen
zwischen Fußgängern und automatisierten Fahrzeugen
Claudia Witzlack, Luka-Franziska Bluhm, Sarah Schubert, Matthias Beggiato & Josef F. Krems
TU Chemnitz, Institut für Psychologie
claudia.witzlack@psychologie.tu-chemnitz.de

Kommunikation zwischen verschiedenen Verkehrsteilnehmern ist notwendig, um einen sicheren und
störungsfreien Verkehrsfluss im komplexen System des Straßenverkehrs zu ermöglichen. Mit
zunehmender Fahrzeugautomatisierung muss nicht mehr nur der Fahrer, sondern auch das Fahrzeug
in der Lage sein, eine Situation mit Kommunikationsbedarf zu erkennen und sinnvoll zu lösen. In
zwei experimentellen Studien wurden daher explizite, visuelle Kommunikationsmöglichkeiten am
Fahrzeug, als auch das Abbremsen als informelles Kommunikationssignal untersucht. Es konnte
gezeigt werden, dass explizite Signale mit einer guten Sichtbarkeit und eindeutigen text- oder
symbolbasierten Handlungshinweisen zur Querung der Fahrbahn, positiv wahrgenommen wurden.
Dennoch bleiben bei visueller Kommunikation Probleme bestehen, wie etwa die Sichtbarkeit und
Lesbarkeit unter verschiedenen Licht- und Wetterbedingungen. Es wurde daher in einer zweiten
Studie untersucht, inwieweit bzw. welche Parameter des Abbremsens eine implizite Kommunikation
zwischen Fußgängern und automatisierten Fahrzeugen erlauben. Die Ergebnisse beider Studien
werden im Hinblick auf Gestaltungsempfehlungen potentieller Kommunikationsmöglichkeiten für
automatisierte Fahrzeuge diskutiert. Diese Studien wurden im Rahmen des Projektes „Kooperative
Interaktion mit schwächeren Verkehrsteilnehmern im automatisierten Fahren“ (KIVI) als Teilprojekt des
DFG-Schwerpunktprogramms 1835 „Kooperativ interagierende Automobile“ durchgeführt.

296

Contributions

The influence of incentives on cognitive control: a developmental study
Marc Woirgardt, Nicola K. Ferdinand & Jutta Kray
Saarland University, Department of Psychology
wmaroi@yahoo.de

Developmental studies show that cognitive control continuously increases until early adulthood, while
socio-emotional development reaches its peak in mid-adolescence. Therefore, mid-adolescence is
assumed to be specifically sensitive to receiving incentives. To test this, we examined the influence of
positive and negative incentives as well as the amount of incentives on age differences in cognitive
control. To assess cognitive control, we applied a cued task-switching paradigm and analyzed
mixing (performance on mixed vs. single task blocks) and switching costs (performance on switch vs.
repeat trials). The impact of incentives was measured by comparing trials with cues signaling the
potential for receiving high or low amounts of gains or losses, depending on participant´s response
accuracy. We investigated 128 participants (age range=9-18 years) and found that mixing costs
decreased with increasing age and were lower in high-gain than in low-gain trials, indicating higher
engagement in maintaining and selecting task sets when anticipating high gains. Switching costs
were age-invariant, but seemed to be sensitive to motivational valence, as we found a tendency for
lower switching costs on gain than loss trials. In contrast to models about adolescent development,
we found no evidence for an enhanced influence of incentives on cognitive control in midadolescence.

Choices induce subsequent inhibition of non-chosen target location
and color
Christian Wolf, Anna Heuer, Anna Schubö & Alexander C Schütz

Philipps-Universität Marburg, Allgemeine und Biologische Psychologie
chr.wolf@uni-marburg.de

When making decisions between rewarded options, humans can maximize their payoff by choosing
the option with higher reward. We recently showed that decisions between two rewarded targets
delay subsequent responses to the non-chosen target (Wolf, Heuer, Schubö, & Schütz, 2017). Here,
we explored if this inhibition only applies to the location of the target or also to other target features.
We measured saccade latencies in response to single colored targets left or right from fixation. One
target color was associated with a high, the other one with a low reward. Colors were independent
of target locations and locations were thus not related to the decision. We manipulated the
proportion of interleaved choices within a block (0 or 33%). During choices, both targets were
displayed and participants could choose between them to obtain the corresponding reward. The
influence of reward on single target latencies increased when choices were present. Depending on
the stimulus configuration, we found inter-trial effects for color as well as location, although location
was not informative about the reward. This suggests that choices not only inhibit decision-related but
also decision-unrelated features.

297

Contributions

User-adaptive human-machine interfaces: temporal sensitivity of
electrodermal parameters
Elena Wolf & Barbara Deml

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute of Human and Industrial Engineering (ifab)
elena.wolf@kit.edu

In the context of human-machine-interfaces (HMI), bio-physiological signals like electrodermal activity
provide a noninvasive technique to measure the user’s mental workload without interrupting the
workflow. The challenge for user-adaptive systems is to physiologically differentiate the time interval
of high mental workload, e.g. in case of excessive demands, from the time intervals with low to
moderate mental workload. With the aim of a low latency in the HMI, it is also necessary to specify
which time window is sufficient to guarantee a valid prediction of mental workload. For this purpose,
a laboratory experiment was carried out with 48 participants. Systematic variation of mental
workload was operationalized through three computer-based ball tracking tasks, which steadily
increased their difficulty level in fixed time intervals. In order to identify the state of high mental
workload, participants were instructed to reduce the task difficulty level in case of subjective mental
overload by pressing a key. Based on this support request, the electrodermal signal was divided into
time intervals of 5, 10 and 20 seconds. Parameters for these intervals were statistically analyzed and
compared in terms of their prediction accuracy for mental overload. Implications for the use of
electrodermal parameters in adaptive HMI are discussed.

Response preparation with reliable cues decreases response
competition in the flanker task
Peter Wühr1, Christian Frings2 & Herbert Heuer3

TU Dortmund University, Department of Psychology; 2Trier University, Department of Psychology; 3Leibniz Research
Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors (IfADo)
peter.wuehr@tu-dortmund.de
1

We tested the hypothesis that selective response preparation, based on reliable response cues,
reduces or eliminates response conflict in an Eriksen flanker task. Previous studies of this issue
produced inconclusive results because presenting a valid response cue before the actual stimulus
display turns a choice-response task into a simple-response task, in which full processing of the
stimulus display containing both the relevant stimulus and irrelevant stimuli, which trigger the
response conflict, is no longer necessary. We conducted two experiments in which we matched
stimulus processing in conditions without cues and with fully reliable cues as far as possible. In both
experiments, we presented a nogo target stimulus in 25% of the trials. The different cueing
conditions were presented in separate blocks in Experiment 1, but mixed within blocks in Experiment
2. In addition discrimination of the nogo target stimulus from the go stimuli was made more difficult
in Experiment 2. The most important result was the reduction of response conflict as induced by
incompatible flanker stimuli in both experiments with reliable response cues. This finding supports the
notion of a negative preparation-interference relationship.

298

Contributions

The aging lexicon: Differences in the semantic networks of younger
and older adults
Dirk U Wulff1, Thomas T Hills2 & Rui Mata1
University of Basel; 2University of Warwick
dirk.wulff@gmail.com

1

Cognitive aging is often equated with cognitive decline. However, while fluid abilities, such as
reasoning, working memory, and processing speed, decline, crystallized abilities rise. One variable
that appears to particularly defy the common developmental trend is vocabulary size, showing
performance increases into late adulthood. Based on this finding, it was recently demonstrated that
the rise in vocabulary size, and crystallized abilities in general, may in parts be responsible for the
decline in more fluid abilities. Building upon this hypothesis, we present evidence using a networkapproach that older and younger adults’ representations of words, also known as their mental
lexicon, differ not only in size but also in structure. Moreover, I will show that these structural
differences in the mental lexica of younger and older adults can be explained in terms of differences
in the amount of experiences made by younger and older adults. In light of known connections
between network structure and cognitive functioning, these results strengthen the view of cognitive
decline being driven by extended learning, rather than cognitive or neuronal deterioration.

Stereotype Reliance in Source Guessing: State Versus Cognitive Trait?
Liliane Wulff & Beatrice G. Kuhlmann

University of Mannheim, Chair for Cognitive Psychology and Individual Differences (Psychology III)
lwulff@mail.uni-mannheim.de

People rely on prior knowledge (e.g., stereotypes) to guess the origin of information if they do not
remember the actual source. In two experiments, we examined the stability and determinants of
stereotype-based source guessing. In Experiment 1 (N = 207), participants worked on two distinct
source-monitoring tasks using age-stereotypic item material, either separated by 10 minutes or seven
days. In Experiment 2 (N = 72), participants worked on two distinct source-monitoring tasks using
item material of different stereotype domains (age & gender). We used a Bayesian hierarchical
multinomial processing tree model to estimate cross-task correlations of stereotype-based source
guessing over time and across stereotype domains. Preliminary data analyses of both experiments
suggest at best weak correlative evidence for cross-task stability. Individual parameter estimates of
source guessing were predominantly constant over time (E1) and across stereotype domains (E2).
Other source-monitoring parameters, old-new guessing and item and source memory, indicated
stability. Stereotype reliance in source guessing could not be explained by personality trait scores
(Big Five, Need for Cognition, Faith in Intuition). We discuss the results with regard to their
interpretation of stereotype-based source guessing as a stable cognitive trait or fluctuating state.

299

Contributions

Credit Assignment and Reinforcement Learning in Environments with
Multiple Feedback
Franz Wurm, Benjamin Ernst & Marco Steinhauser
Catholic University of Eichstätt-Ingolstadt
franz.wurm@ku.de

In many situations, links between actions and corresponding outcomes are not necessarily clear and
obvious for the decision maker. Especially in probabilistic and volatile environments, this credit
assignment problem arises from insufficient information on environmental contingencies. In the
present study, we investigated the mechanisms capable of solving the credit assignment problem in a
reinforcement learning framework. We employed a probabilistic learning task with multiple
independent stages. While decisions on each stage were rewarded separately, color-coded
feedback stimuli for each decision were presented in parallel without explicitly indicating which
feedback color was linked to which decision. Afterwards, a transfer devaluation task was employed,
which could only be solved, when decision-feedback associations were established during the
learning task. As predicted, findings from both learning task and transfer task clearly indicate
successful credit assignment. Interestingly, emerging decision-feedback associations were not bound
to resemble the environmental contingencies. Computational models of reinforcement learning were
used to further elucidate the mechanisms underlying (mal)adaptive credit assignment.

Content and temporal event knowledge of elderly people
Michelle Wyrobnik1, Elke van der Meer2 & Gesa Schaadt3

Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut für Psychologie, Kognitive Psychologie; 2Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Institut
für Psychologie, Seniorprofessur Kognitive Psychologie; 3Max-Planck-Institut für Kognitions- und Neurowissenschaften,
Abteilung Neurologie
michelle.wyrobnik@hu-berlin.de

1

The present study aimed to investigate the processing of content (knowledge about the sub-events
that belong to an event) and temporal (knowledge about the temporal order of the subevents within
the event) event knowledge in healthy elderly adults compared to younger adults by analyzing ERPs
that are related to event knowledge processing (e.g. N400 and P600 components). For both groups
responses were analyzed either to correctly presented event sequences or to event sequences that
contained a content or temporal error. Both groups showed similar ERP responses: In response to
content errors in event sequences, both groups showed a N400, indicating a mismatch reaction to
the presented erroneous events and the established event model in working memory, and a
posteriorly distributed P600, indicating a failed attempt to integrate the presented events into a new
event model. In response to temporal errors in event sequences, both groups showed no N400 but
an anteriorly distributed P600, indicating that both groups reorganized the presented events into the
right temporal order and succeeded in integrating the reorganized events into a new event model.
The present study shows, that event knowledge processing is preserved in aging, as older adults
showed similar performances as younger adults.

300

Contributions

Investigating the Influences of Time to Collision and Closing Speed on
Driver Uncertainty in Lane Change Maneuvers
Fei Yan1 & Martin Baumann2

OFFIS- Institute for Information Technology; 2Ulm University
yan@offis.de
1

Driver uncertainty during lane changes can induce long reaction times and potentially lead to
dangerous crashes, which has not been studied before. This paper aims to investigate driver
uncertainty during lane change decisions under influences of time to collision (TTC) and closing
speed. A driving simulator study was conducted with 29 participants, where TTC and closing speed
between a subject vehicle and an approaching car were varied within participants. Participants had
to decide if a lane change to the left would be safe or not in a given traffic situation triggered by an
acoustic signal. Reaction times, subjective uncertainty scores and action proportions for lane change
decisions were recorded. The results show that both TTC and closing speed have significant effects
on reaction times, uncertainty scores, and response actions for lane change decisions. Furthermore,
closing speed has more influences on uncertainty scores than TTC. It means that when an
approaching vehicle drives faster, longest reaction times, lowest subjective uncertainty scores and
the majority of decisions for changing the lane appear earlier with short TTCs. Besides, reaction time
is significantly negatively correlated with uncertainty score, which means that the more uncertain
drivers are, the longer participants take to respond.

How do we distinguish between emotions? Analysing the kinematics
of emotional interactions
Adam Zabicki, Julia Bachmann & Jörn Munzert

Nemolab – NeuromotorBehavior Laboratory, Justus-Liebig-University Giessen
adam.zabicki@sport.uni-giessen.de

The ability to recognise emotional states when observing social interactions can be assessed with a
wide range of laboratory stimuli, such as static or dynamic faces and bodies, presented on a
computer screen. It has been shown that even solely kinematic information, e.g. point-light displays,
are sufficient for an accurate identification of emotional states. However, so far it has not been
systematically investigated which kinematic parameters are critical in the process of distinguishing
between emotions when observing emotional interactions. In the present study, we recorded
emotional scenes, displayed by two non-professional actors, which differed in emotional content
(anger, happiness, love, sadness) and intensity (high, medium, low). A validation study showed high
performances in emotion recognition. We analysed several interaction-specific parameters (e.g.
interindividual distance or hand movements) and tested whether these parameters differ between
emotions and intensities. Results revealed emotion dependent differences in several parameters. For
instance, the spatial distance between persons is significantly smaller in the love interaction
condition. Moreover, the covered distance by the actor’s hands is smaller in love and sad
interactions compared to angry and happy interactions.

301

Contributions

Mental and Manual Rotation of Physical Three-Dimensional Objects
Stefanie Zander1, Stefan Brandenburg2 & Elisabeth Brandenburg1

Fraunhofer Institut für Produktionsanlagen und Konstruktionstechnik, Virtuelle Produktentstehung, Modellbasiertes
Entwickeln; 2Technische Universität Berlin, Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics
stefan.brandenburg@tu-berlin.de

1

In 1971 Shepard and Metzler firstly developed a rotation task showing that people are able to
mentally rotate objects. Since then several experiments investigated the relationship of participants’
reaction time with the objects’ angle of rotation by using modifications of Shepard and Metzler’s
task. Yet all experiments presented their stimuli on a display. The present study, in contrast, used
physical three-dimensional objects instead. The participants’ task was to either mentally or manually
rotate one of two different physical objects (pyramid or L-form) in order to decide whether it differs
from the respective reference object or not. In addition, task complexity (high or low) and angle of
rotation were varied. Participants’ reaction times, errors and pupil diameter as measures of mental
workload were assessed. The results, for example, revealed effects of type of rotation (mental or
manual) on the dependent variables. Manual rotation led to significant lower error rates and less
mental workload. The object type effected reaction types and error rates. Differences in task
complexity affected participants’ reaction time and error rates, but not mental workload. The findings
suggest that manual rotation might be less demanding than mental rotation and that stimulus
complexity effects mental rotation performance.

Unconscious processing of numbers: How important is the response
format?
Iris Zerweck, Sascha Meyen, Florian Friedrich, Klara J. Grethen & Volker H. Franz
University of Tübingen, Experimental Cognitive Science
iris.zerweck@uni-tuebingen.de

To evaluate unconscious processing of numbers, we used a classic priming paradigm: In a 'direct'
task, participants classified a masked 'prime'-stimulus (i.e., decided whether it is a number larger or
smaller than 5). In this task, participants typically perform close to chance, suggesting no conscious
awareness of the prime. In an 'indirect' task, the masked prime was also presented, but participants
responded to another stimulus (decided whether that number was larger or smaller than 5).
Typically, the prime has effects on reaction times in the indirect task, which is usually interpreted as
preserved unconscious processing of the prime. However, this paradigm could be problematic,
because participants are restricted to a binary response in the direct task. To assess whether
participants have access to a richer, continuous representation of the prime in the direct task, we had
12 participants give a binary response and also judge their confidence on a continuous scale. We
found that confidence modulated the accuracy of prime detection: Overall accuracy (mean+/-SEM):
58.6%+/-1.4%; accuracy in high/low-confidence trials: 64.4%+/-2.1% / 53.5%+/-1.1%,
respectively. We will discuss to which degree this effect could be exploited to improve the response
format in such paradigms.

302

Contributions

Emotional Influence on Context-Specific Proportion Congruent Effect:
Neutral or Emotional Facial Expressions as Context Stimuli
Jinhui Zhang, Andrea Kiesel & David Dignath
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
jinhui.zhang@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de

The context-specific proportion congruent (CSPC) effect refers to the phenomenon that congruence
effects assessed, for example, in a Flanker task diminish in contexts associated with a high
proportion of incongruent trials compared to contexts associated with a low proportion of
incongruent trials. With the current experiment, we aimed to assess emotional influences on the
CSPC effect. We presented either neutral or emotional facial expressions as context stimuli in a letter
Flanker task. To reproduce the CSPC effect, we associated mostly incongruent trials with either male
or female faces for the neutral-context group and associated mostly incongruent trials with either
angry or happy faces for the emotional-context group. To assess general influences of emotions, we
compared the size of CSPC effects between the neutral-context group and the emotional-context
group. To assess valence-specific influences of emotions, we compared the size of CSPC effects—for
the emotional-context group only—between participants for whom mostly incongruent trials were
associated with angry faces and participants for whom mostly incongruent trials were associated
with happy faces. Results showed no evidence of emotional general or valence-specific influences on
the size of CSPC effects.

Influence of segmentation of subsequence help sequence learning in
multitasking
Fang Zhao1, Robert Gaschler1, Eva Röttger2 & Hilde Haider2
FernUniversity in Hagen, Psychology; 2University of Cologne
fang.zhao@fernuni-hagen.de

1

After replicated the previous research of Vaquero et al. (2006), we did not observe sequence
learning when each block contains 10 repeated training sequences with 12 elements (second-order
sequence) and 2 deviant sequences. Lozano, Hard & Tversky (2006) let participants perform real-life
assembly tasks and found participants learned the task better through segments. We thus aimed to
examine whether segmentation of subsequence can help sequence learning in multitasking. An
experiment was conducted. Group 1 (N = 27) learned the sequence WITH segmentation. They
learned the second-order sequence in two packages (e.g. Package A: 1-2-3-4; Package B: 3-2-1-4).
They received these two packages in the first 3 blocks randomly. Then we showed them the complete
sequence in block 4-6, then deviant sequences in single tasking condition and dual tasking
condition. Group 2 (N = 27) conversely learned the sequence WITHOUT segmentation. They were
trained with the repeating sequences first and then deviant sequences. Results showed no difference
of reaction times between Group 1 and Group 2. Sequence learning occurred in Group 1 (with
segmentation) and in Group 2 (without segmentation) only in single tasking.

303

Contributions

Differential effects of distractions and interruptions on task
performance. An EEG study using a continuous number task
Bianca Zickerick, Kristina Küper, Sven Thönes, S. Oliver Kobald & Edmund Wascher
Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors
zickerick@ifado.de

Negative effects of interruptions and distractions on cognition are well documented. However little is
known about the mechanisms underlying these two types of interference. In an EEG study, we
examined the impact of interruptions and distractions on the performance of younger adults in a
continuous number task. In this task, a random sequence of single digits (1 to 6) was presented.
Participants had to either decide whether the current digit (N0; no load) or the sum of the current
and the preceding digit (S-1; high load) was odd or even. Additionally, participants had to ignore
single letters (distractions) or react to single letters (interruptions) that were randomly presented on
25% of all trials in different blocks. Surprisingly, in the S-1 condition, both accuracy and reaction
times were significantly improved on trials following a distraction. Sustained frontal negativity
indicated that the preceding digit was successfully maintained in working memory during distraction.
Interruptions were more disruptive. In trials following an interruption, less frontal negativity as well as
a lower P3b indicated higher working memory load due to the interruption. Our results suggest
different neural mechanisms for the processing of interruptions vs. distractions in tasks involving high
cognitive load.

Take it easy: Using cumulative prospect theory to understand the
influence of option complexity on age differences in risk attitude
Veronika Zilker & Thorsten Pachur

Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Rationality
zilker@mpib-berlin.mpg.de

It has often been concluded that in decisions under risk older adults are more risk averse than
younger adults. This conclusion is based on the finding that older adults are more likely to choose
safe over risky gains. However, safe outcomes may be especially attractive to older adults because
they are easier to process than risky options that require integrating several probabilistic outcomes.
We show that when differences between options in complexity are experimentally controlled for, the
apparent age differences in risk attitude disappears. Therefore, the frequently claimed increase in
risk aversion in older adults may be largely due to confounded stimulus material. Using cumulative
prospect theory (CPT) we examine the cognitive mechanisms underlying the impact of option
complexity: CPT’s weighting function becomes more linear when complexity is controlled for, and
this effect is particularly strong in older adults. Further, controlling for option complexity decreases
age differences in utility distortion, making CPT’s value functions similarly nonlinear in both age
groups. Finally, response noise in the decision making process increases under higher complexity.
This, however, affects older adults and younger adults alike.

304

Contributions

Perceptual Fluency, Metacognitive Beliefs, or Both – What Drives the
Effect of Font Size on Judgments of Learning?
Malte F. Zimdahl & Monika Undorf

University of Mannheim, Department of Psychology
malte.zimdahl@psychologie.uni-mannheim.de

People think that they will remember words printed in a larger 48 point font better than words
printed in a smaller 18 point font, as revealed by judgments of learning (JOLs). However, actual
memory performance is usually unaffected by this manipulation. Recent evidence suggests that the
font size effect on JOLs is based on people’s beliefs about how font size affects memory
performance. The current study tested whether perceptual fluency would contribute to the font size
effect when font sizes differed more in perceptual fluency than 48 and 18 point fonts. We therefore
manipulated font size between 6 point and 500 point. In four experiments, perceptual fluency –
measured as response times in a lexical decision task – was lower for very small and very large font
sizes than for intermediate font sizes. In contrast, JOLs increased monotonically with font size. This
suggests that metacognitive beliefs rather than perceptual fluency underlie the font size effect on
JOLs. Additionally, recall performance was better for large words. Thus, there is some justification for
the belief that large font sizes help memory.

A systematic comparison of the performance with different fingers in
softness discrimination
Aaron Cedric Zöller & Knut Drewing

Justus-Liebig-Universität, Allgemeine Psychologie
aaron.zoeller@psychol.uni-giessen.de

Haptic softness discrimination has been studied for different types of exploration behavior like
pressing, squeezing or tapping, but is usually limited to behavior that can be derived from the
exploration procedures described by Lederman and Klatzky (1987). For example, in studies that
investigate softness discrimination with one finger participants are typically instructed to use their
index finger. Performance with the other fingers is rarely investigated. However, Katz (1925)
observed that in spontaneous exploration people prefer to use middle or index fingers. We
wondered whether fingers differ in their ability to discriminate softness. In the present study we
systematically compared thresholds when exploring with one of the four fingers of the dominant
hand. According to our hypothesis, discrimination thresholds should be smaller for index and middle
finger as compared to ring and little finger. In each trial participants compared the compliance of
two different rubber stimuli. We used a 2AFC discrimination task combined with the method of
constant stimuli. We kept the forces that were applied to the stimuli constant and controlled the
number of indentations. Results indicate that performance varies with the exploring finger in
unexpected ways. We will discuss the results in terms of optimal exploration behavior.

305

Contributions

A direct comparison of evolutionary-relevant and modern stimuli in
visual search – Does fear have an advantage at all?
András Norbert Zsidó1, Orsolya Inhóf2, Gergely Darnai3, Árpád Csathó4, Andras Matuz4, Beatrix
Lábadi2 & Laszlo Bernath5

University of Pécs; 2Institute of Psychology, University of Pécs; 3Institute of Psychology, University of Pécs; Department
of Neurology, University of Pécs, Medical School; MTA-PTE Clinical Neuroscience MR Research Group;
4
Department of Behavioural Sciences, University of Pécs; 5Faculty of Education and Psychology, Eötvös Loránd
University
zsido.andras@pte.hu
1

Large body of research investigated whether there is an automatic attentional procession that favours
threatening stimuli over non-threatening. However, the classical visual search paradigms have been
met with criticism. Thus, we propose a new paradigm using real-life scenes to improve ecological
validity. Participants had to find different objects (four categories: neutral or threatening and
evolutionary-relevant or modern) presented on different backgrounds (evolutionary-relevant or
modern), in two spatial positions (close to fovea or the periphery). They responded using touchscreens. In Experiment 1, we compared snakes and guns (threatening evolutionary and modern,
respectively) to cats and pens. In Experiment 2, we included more objects per stimulus category
(three instead of one). All images used were controlled for possibly confounding low-level visual
features such as contrast, frequency, brightness, and image complexity. In Experiment 1, threatening
targets were found faster compared to neutral cues irrespective of the evolutionary relevance. In
contrast, in Experiment 2, threatening targets had no advantage over neutral ones. Interestingly, the
type of background, and position of the stimuli only affected the detection of neutral targets. We
claim that our results mean that some stimuli might be more strongly associated with threat than
others thus having an advantage in visual search.

Intuition and Rationality – (Dis-)Fluency in Economic Trust Games
Michael Zürn

University of Cologne, Social and Economic Cognition II
michael.zuern@uni-koeln.de

Cooperation and exchange generally are beneficial for all involved parties. However, such
interactions also entail the risk of betrayal and exploitation. Therefore, prospective interaction
partners need to trust each other in order to realize the benefits of cooperation. Similar to
expectations in general, trust in particular may be based on extensive information about a potential
partner but also on decision makers’ intuitions. Existing theoretical frameworks explaining the
psychological dynamics of intuitive judgments assign a prominent role to processing fluency. There,
fluency elicits positive affect which may lead to positive judgments about another person’s
characteristics (e.g. trustworthiness). At the same time, experiencing disfluency may also be a cue to
infer competence. As such, disfluency may also trigger economic rationality which often commands
to distrust others. Therefore, either fluency creates trust or disfluency creates distrust. To address these
opposing hypotheses, we use different variations of economic Trust Games. In detail, we use the
names assigned to the players as vehicles to induce experiences of articulatory fluency while varying
the payoff structure of the games. In this talk, I will overview the findings from a series of experiments
(N > 1000) and discuss the empirical validity of both theoretical accounts.

306

Author index
Abbasi, H. 13
Abdel Rahman, R. 13, 23, 145
Abedi Khoozani, P. 14
Abendroth, B. 179
Abfalter, D. 238
Ache, F. 14
Achtziger, A. 161
Ackermann, H. 56
Adam, K. 15
Ahlberg, D. 263
Ahrens, F.K. 161
Ajisuksmo, C. 15
Albrecht, R. 16, 114
Alexandrowicz, R. 97
Allefeld, C. 47
Alley, L.M. 16
Almeida, P. 50
Alves, H. 17
Ansorge, U. 21, 36, 43, 91, 96
Antoch, G. 25
Antons, S. 17
Arent, R. 18
Arías, M.G. 287
Armstrong, R. 33
Aslan, A. 42, 124
Aßfalg, A. 18
Attig, C. 19
Atzert, C. 19
Aune, M. 192
Averbeck, H. 20
Avraamides, M. 104
Bachmann, J. 120, 301
Bading, K.C. 20
Baess, P. 21, 99, 286
Bahn, D. 276
Baier, D. 21
Bart, V.K. 22
Barth, A. 22, 235
Bärwinkel, H. 182
Bastian, J. 23, 210
Baum, J. 23
Baumann, C. 24
Baumann, M. 24, 195, 260, 301
Bäumer, T. 152
Bayen, U.J. 35, 226
Becevová, M. 25
Bechtold, L. 25
Becker, L. 26, 61
Becker, M. 26
Becker, S. 68
Beege, M. 174
Beggiato, M. 296

Behler, C. 202
Behne, D.M. 192
Belardinelli, A. 159
Belfi, A. 276
Belke, E. 69
Bell, R. 27, 174, 214
Bellebaum, C. 25, 87
Beller, S. 218
Bender, A. 218
Bendixen, A. 186
Berg, P.M. 27, 135
Berger, A.M. 28
Berger, K.T. 28, 118
Bergmann, N. 29
Berkessel, J. 29
Bermeitinger, C. 21, 99, 108, 232, 286
Bernath, L. 306
Berndt, E. 30, 291
Bernstein, D.M. 30
Berres, S. 31
Besken, M. 31
Best, J.F. 180
Bestelmeyer, P.E. 180
Bieleke, M. 32
Biermann-Ruben, K. 32
Billino, J. 33
Bisby, J. 251
Blank, H. 33
Blaschke, S. 135
Blech, C. 34
Bledowski, C. 52, 73, 198
Blohm, G. 14
Bluhm, L. 296
Blum, K. 285
Bock, O. 286
Böckler, A. 93, 212
Böffel, C. 34, 183
Bogon, J. 58
Böhm, M.F. 35
Bohner, G. 35, 89, 268
Bommes, J. 36
Bönsel, R. 36
Born, J. 188
Bötsch, I. 37
Botsch, M. 202
Bott, F. 37
Braem, S. 38, 269
Brand, M. 17, 20, 46, 122, 183, 287
Brandenburg, E. 302
Brandenburg, S. 133, 189, 214, 266, 302
Brandwayn, N.E. 25
Brass, M. 269

307

Author index
Bratzke, D. 38
Braun, D. 39
Braun, D.I. 90
Braun, J. 120
Braus, N. 281
Bremmer, F. 139
Brockhoff, A. 195
Brockmann, M. 39
Bröder, A. 40, 226
Broeker, L. 40
Bromberek-Dyzman, K. 132
Bruchmann, M. 55, 217, 232
Brüning, J. 41, 210
Brunner-Sperdin, A. 238
Bryce, D. 38
Bublak, P. 41, 135, 147
Bucher, A. 42
Buchner, A. 27, 169, 174, 177, 214
Büchner, V. 134
Bufe, J. 42
Burgess, N. 251
Büsel, C. 43
Butz, M.V. 159
Cajar, A. 43
Calcagnì, A. 44
Calcott, R. 44
Cañal-Bruland, R. 45, 180
Cao, L. 45, 100
Carbon, C. 179, 191, 204
Carbonell, G. 46
Chakkour, G. 242
Chandra, J. 46
Chen, J. 133
Chiou, S. 47
Choi, S. 91
Chong, S. 25
Christiansen, H. 27
Christophel, T.B. 47
Christopher, B. 255
Chuang, L. 24, 48, 149, 230
Conci, A. 48
Conci, M. 49
Contreras Saavedra, C. 49
Coors, A. 50
Coppin, G. 227
Cordero Rull, M. 25
Corneille, O. 28, 50
Cosper, S.H. 51
Csathó, Á. 51, 168, 306
Culham, J.C. 86, 133, 249
Czernochowski, D. 52
Czoschke, S. 52, 73
D’Alessandro, M. 44
Dahm, S.F. 213

308

Daichendt, Y. 61
Dal Mas, D. 254
Dambacher, M. 32
Danek, A.H. 53
Darcy, N. 111
Darnai, G. 53, 121, 306
De Houwer, J. 233
de la Rosa, S. 54
Debats, N.B. 54
DeBellis, E. 241
Degé, F. 55, 276
Delazer, M. 183
Dellert, T. 55
Deml, B. 120, 213, 298
Derksen, D.G. 30
Deschrijver, E. 269
Deubel, H. 100
Deutsch, R. 107, 108, 137
Dicke, P. 138
Diedenhofen, B. 56
Dietrich, S. 56, 216
Dignath, D. 57, 261, 303
Dillmann, J. 57
Dittrich, K. 282
Dobel, C. 272
Doeller, C.F. 188
Dolk, T. 58, 222
Döllken, M. 213
Dörrenbächer, S. 58
Dörschner, K. 16
Dötsch, D. 13, 59
Douven, I. 253
Draschkow, D. 59
Dreisbach, G. 28, 44, 58, 79, 106, 126,
222
Drescher, U. 286
Drewing, K. 60, 261, 305
Drewitz, U. 119
Drueke, B. 60
Druey, M.D. 81, 284
Dshemuchadse, M. 229
Dubravac, M. 61
Dudschig, C. 30, 193, 219
Dümig, M. 61
Dummel, S. 62, 164
Durst, M. 62
Dutke, S. 237
Eberhardt, L.V. 63
Ebersbach, M. 67
Ebert, A. 264
Eckert, A. 63
Eder, A.B. 64, 93, 176
Egger, J. 152
Ehret, S. 64

Author index
Eibl, M. 295
Eickhoff, S.B. 149
Einhäuser, W. 19, 65, 186, 277
Eisenhauer, S. 65
Elleringmann, L. 89
Ellinghaus, R. 66
Elschner, S.G. 66
Elsen, S. 216
End, F. 67
Endres, D. 14, 50, 63, 136
Engbert, R. 43, 46
Engeln, A. 195, 260
Erdfelder, E. 31, 105, 236
Erdwien, B. 244, 263
Erle, T.M. 64, 67
Ernst, B. 68, 163, 300
Ernst, D. 68
Ernst, J. 69
Esmaeili Bijarsari, S. 69, 295
Ewerdwalbesloh, J.A. 130
Exner, V. 70
Fabius, J. 70
Fabry, R.E. 85
Falandays, J.B. 71
Falkenstein, M. 265
Falschlunger, L. 80
Fels, J. 247
Ferdinand, N.K. 71, 297
Feuerstack, S. 72
Fiebach, C.J. 59, 65, 81, 107, 224, 241
Fieberg, D. 223
Fiedler, K. 202
Fiehler, K. 14, 127, 161, 283
Filipponi, C. 289
Fillinger, M.G. 72
Finke, K. 147
Finke, T. 237
Fintor, E. 73, 258
Fischer, C. 73
Fischer, H. 223
Fischer, M.H. 74
Fischer, R. 28, 74, 115, 138, 155, 176
Fischer, U. 215
Flash, T. 75
Fleming, R.W. 133, 163, 178, 196, 203,
233
Flor, H. 98, 251
Foerster, A. 75
Foerster, R.M. 202
Folyi, T. 76
Förster, R.M. 76
Frame, M. 77
Franke, A. 242
Franke, M. 235

Franklin, D.W. 77
Franz, V.H. 172, 302
Freigang, C. 58
Frick, A. 218
Friedli, M. 78
Friedrich, F. 302
Friehs, M.A. 78
Frigerio, S. 289
Frings, C. 78, 123, 151, 171, 177, 196,
221, 225, 252, 298
Frischkorn, G. 281
Frischkorn, G.T. 92
Fröber, K. 79
Froeber, K. 126
Frühholz, S. 79
Fuchs, X. 80
Fuchs-Leitner, I. 80
Funk, F. 29
Furley, P. 141
Gabriel, U. 131, 192
Gade, M. 81, 102, 211
Gagl, B. 65, 81, 241
Gahr, M. 223
Gail, A. 272
Gaisbauer, F. 82
Gaissmaier, W. 92
Gajewski, P.D. 265
Galinsky, A. 84
Garrido-Vásquez, P. 82
Gartus, A. 83
Gaschler, R. 34, 83, 121, 185, 219, 287,
303
Gast, A. 17, 84
Gauer, L. 84
Gauggel, S. 279
Gazzo Castaneda, L. 85, 254
Gegenfurtner, K.R. 90
Gehb, G. 57, 85
Gerhard, T.M. 86
Gerjets, P. 128, 148, 181, 227
Germar, M. 86
Gershman, S. 24
Gerwien, J. 165
Getzmann, S. 127
Ghio, M. 25, 87
Gibbons, H. 141, 248
Giesen, C. 87
Gillich, I.M. 88
Glaser, M. 88
Glaser, T. 89
Glöckner, A. 185, 186
Gloriani, A.H. 89
Gluth, S. 90, 288
Goehringer, F. 150

309

Author index
Goettker, A. 90
Gohl, I. 91
Golch, J. 81
Goller, F. 91, 96
Gollwitzer, M. 176
Gollwitzer, P.M. 32
Gomilsek, T. 92
Goris, J. 269
Gosselin, F. 293
Göttmann, J. 92
Götz, F.J. 93
Gradwohl, N. 93
Grage, T. 94, 131, 236
Gramann, K. 94
Granowski, M. 95
Greiter, L. 95, 262
Grethen, K.J. 302
Grewe, T. 154
Grimm, S. 186
Grisoni, L. 96
Gross, R. 292
Gründling, J.P. 162
Grüner, M. 96
Gula, B. 97
Güldenpenning, I. 97, 201
Guldner, S. 98
Gunduz Can, R. 98
Günther, A. 147
Gygax, P. 131, 192
Hackbart, M. 99
Hackländer, R. 99
Haeger, M. 286
Hahn, U. 281
Haider, H. 83, 162, 219, 287, 303
Hamm, A. 74
Händel, B. 100
Hanning, N.M. 100
Hanrieder, M. 101
Haraped, L. 154, 165
Harpaintner, M. 101, 252
Hartmann, E. 102
Hartmann, R. 102
Hasenbein, L.C. 103
Haslbeck, J.M. 103
Hatzipanayioti, A. 101, 104
Hawelka, S. 81
Hayhoe, M. M. 7
Haynes, J. 47
He, Y. 104
Hecht, H. 105, 279, 290
Heck, D.W. 105
Heed, T. 80, 246, 264
Heene, M. 110
Hefer, C. 106

310

Hegele, M. 106, 123, 150, 168, 243
Heikel, E.A. 59, 107
Heineck, P.M. 93, 107
Heinze, S. 36
Heitmann, C. 108
Hellweg, C. 99, 108
Helm, F. 148
Hendriati, A. 15
Hendricks, I. 216
Hennig, M. 109
Henninger, F. 103, 109, 115, 266
Herbert, C. 292
Herbort, O. 110
Herms, R. 295
Hernádi, I. 51, 168
Herrera-Bennett, A. 103, 110, 117
Hertrich, I. 56
Hertwig, R. 153
Herwig, A. 111
Hesse, F.W. 244
Hesselmann, G. 111
Heuer, A. 112, 297
Heuer, H. 54, 298
Heuer, K. 278
Heycke, T. 112
Hickey, C. 22, 116
Hilbig, B.E. 109, 115, 266
Hills, T.T. 299
Hindriks, F. 253
Hirsch, P. 113
Hoffmann, A. 113, 170
Hoffmann, J. 114
Hoffmann, J.A. 16, 92, 190
Hoffmann, M.A. 114
Hoffstadt, J. 263
Högden, F. 17, 84
Horsten, L. 115
Horstmann, G. 68
Hosang, T. 115
Houpt, J. 77
Huber-Huber, C. 116
Hübner, C. 116
Hübner, R. 32, 66, 72, 164, 175, 284
Huckauf, A. 63, 95, 200, 262
Huemer, A.K. 117, 209, 278
Huestegge, L. 114, 149, 199, 205, 212
Huff, M. 172, 195
Humayoun, S.R. 264
Hurlemann, R. 242
Husagic, L. 117
Hütter, M. 14, 28, 109, 118, 119, 146
Hwang, B. 118
Iamshchinina, P. 47
Ihme, K. 119

Author index
Ihmels, M. 119
Ilg, W. 120
Imbsweiler, J. 120
Inhóf, O. 53, 121, 306
Irina, M. 121
Isik, I. 276
Jacobsen, T. 88, 255, 268
Jäger, G. 235
Janczyk, M. 62, 122, 184, 235, 277
Janeczko, J. 122
Janouch, C. 286
Jansen, A. 18
Jansen, P. 199
Janszky, J. 53
Jensen, A. 123
Joch, M. 123, 168
John, T. 124
Johnson, J. 77
Joos, E. 124
Jost, K. 125
Jovanovic, B. 85, 125
Jurczyk, V. 126
Kaernbach, C. 215, 280
Kaiser, J. 52, 73, 126, 198
Kaiser, K. 101
Kamp-Becker, I. 18
Karádi, K. 168
Karbach, J. 113
Karimpur, H. 127
Karthaus, M. 127
Kastner, L. 128
Kattert, G. 244, 263
Kaup, B. 30, 193, 219, 263, 291
Kauschke, C. 276
Kazazi, J. 294
Kegel, V. 170
Keijsers, N.L. 129
Keil, J. 128
Kellen, D. 293
Keller, A. 129
Kenny, A. 190
Keshavarz, B. 105
Keye, D. 234
Keyser, J. 129
Khader, P.H. 130
Kiefer, M. 223, 252, 270
Kiesel, A. 130, 176, 198, 261, 303
Kieslich, P.J. 94, 103, 105, 109, 131, 236
Kikumoto, A. 125
Kim, J.D. 131
King, J. 251
Kipnis, A. 92
Kircher, T. 33, 197, 257, 261
Kirches, C. 223

Kisander, Z. 168
Kißler, J.M. 132
Klaffehn, A.L. 132
Klatt, L. 235
Klauer, K. 18, 26, 197, 282
Klein, L.K. 133, 163
Kleinjan, A. 133
Kleinsorge, T. 228
Klepp, A. 32
Klichowicz, A. 134
Klimecki, L. 134
Klinghammer, M. 14, 161
Klingner, C. 147
Kloster, J. 135
Kluckow, S. 135
Knauff, M. 85, 254
Knoeferle, P. 187
Knoop, C.A. 170
Knopp, B. 50, 63, 136
Knops, A. 88
Kobald, S.O. 304
Koch, D. 29
Koch, I. 22, 49, 73, 113, 188, 247, 258
Koester, D. 98, 136
Kopp, B. 258
Koranyi, N. 87, 238
Körner, A. 137
Kornmeier, J. 124
Kovacevic, I. 137
Kozlik, J. 70, 138
Kracht, F. 144
Kraemer, P.M. 138
Krajbich, I. 288
Krala, M. 139
Krasotkina, A. 139
Kraus, J.M. 140
Krause, D. 140
Krause, T. 189
Kray, J. 58, 160, 182, 297
Krefeld-Schwalb, A. 141
Kreitz, C. 141, 204, 206
Krems, J.F. 19, 134, 162, 296
Kretschmer, F. 292
Kreutzfeldt, M.E. 258
Krishna, A. 142
Krist, H. 144
Kroiss, A. 142
Kroneisen, M. 143
Krügel, A. 46
Krüger, A. 143
Krüger, M. 67, 144
Kubicek, C. 85
Kübler, S. 144
Kuhbandner, C. 158

311

Author index
Kuhlen, A.K. 145
Kuhlmann, B.G. 145, 226, 299
Kühnel, A. 146
Kukken, N. 146
Kunde, W. 64, 75, 97, 132, 147, 211,
270, 290, 295
Künstler, E.C. 147
Küper, K. 304
Kurz, J. 148, 185
Lábadi, B. 53, 121, 306
Lach, B. 45
Lachmair, M. 148
Lachmann, T. 264
Lahmer, M. 149
Lammers, J. 84
Lange, F. 258
Langner, R. 149
Langsdorf, L. 150
Lansner, J. 150
Lappe, M. 151
Laub, R. 151
Laubrock, J. 43
Leder, H. 83, 175, 237
Lee, M.M. 193
Lehner, O. 80
Leinberger, S. 152
Lemhöfer, K. 152
Lepp, F. 263
Lerche, V. 153, 281
Leuker, C. 153
Leuthold, H. 219
Lezkan, A. 60
Liebherr, M. 20, 154
Liefooghe, B. 228, 233
Liegl, S. 154, 165
Liepelt, R. 115, 155
Liesefeld, A.M. 155
Liesefeld, H.R. 49, 122, 155, 156
Lin, H. 156
Linne, R. 89, 157
Liu, T. 157
Llompart, M. 158
Loderer, K. 158
Lohaus, D. 216
Löhl, V. 87
Lohmann, J. 159
Lohse, J. 223
Lombardi, L. 44
Lörch, L. 159
Lorenz, C. 160
Lorenzen, J. 160
Lu, Z. 161
Ludwig, J. 161
Lukács, G. 97

312

Lüken, M. 236
Lustig, C. 162
Lynn, H. 256
Mach, S. 162
Mack, W. 256
Maiello, G. 133, 163
Maier, M. 134
Maier, M.E. 163
Makarina, N. 164
Malek, S. 164
Männel, C. 51
Manzey, D. 41, 210
Maran, T. 154, 165
Marberg, I. 165
Marhenke, R. 166
Marius, G. 138
Martini, M. 166
Martiny-Huenger, T. 166
Mascelloni, M. 25
Maschmann, I. 167
Mata, R. 299
Mathôt, S. 167
Matuz, A. 51, 168, 306
Maurer, H. 123, 168
Maurer, L.K. 123, 168
Mayr, S. 169, 177
Mayr, U. 125
McGettigan, C. 98
McQueen, J. 152
Medendorp, P.W. 129
Meier, B. 78
Meilinger, T. 101, 262
Meiran, N. 90, 222
Meiser, T. 37
Meissner, F. 169
Meisters, J. 170
Melcher, D. 116
Memmert, D. 141, 204, 206, 288
Menninghaus, W. 170, 285
Mertens, U. 171
Mertens, U.K. 109
Merz, S. 123, 171
Meshi, D. 46
Metzger, A. 60
Meyen, S. 172, 302
Meyerhoff, H.S. 171, 172
Michael, L. 173
Michalke, M. 173
Mierop, A. 50
Mieth, L. 27, 174
Mikheeva, M. 157, 174
Miller, C.A. 175
Miller, J. 130
Minge, M. 251

Author index
Mitrovic, A. 175
Mitschke, V. 176
Mittelstädt, V. 130, 176
Moeller, B. 151, 177
Moeller, K. 181, 215
Mohler, B. 101
Möller, M. 177
Montag, C. 223
Morgenstern, Y. 178
Moutsopoulou, K. 198
Muehl, K. 178
Mueller, A.L. 179
Mueller, J.L. 25, 51
Mueller, R. 179
Mühl, C. 180
Müller, F. 45, 180
Müller, H. 123, 168
Müller, H.J. 49, 155, 156
Müller, J. 128, 181
Müller, L. 182
Müller, R. 36, 182
Müller, S.M. 183, 287
Müller-Bardorff, M. 55
Müller-Plath, G. 292
Münster, K. 187
Münzer, S. 159
Munzert, J. 148, 185, 301
Musch, J. 56, 113, 170
Müsseler, J. 34, 183
Nadarevic, L. 184
Naefgen, C. 184
Nagels, A. 33
Nagy, S. 53
Naumann, T. 185
Nava, E. 289
Nees, F. 98, 251
Neidhardt, E. 15
Neth, H. 82, 93
Nett, N. 185
Nett, T. 185, 186
Neubauer, A.B. 153
Neubert, C.R. 186
Neumann, R. 138
Nguyen, H.T. 187
Niccolai, V. 32
Nie, Q. 49
Niedeggen, M. 187
Noack, H. 188
Nolden, S. 188, 247
Nooij, S. 105
Nuszbaum, M. 189
Nuthmann, A. 19
Oberauer, K. 156, 234
Oberauser, K. 293

Oberem, J. 247
Oberfeld, D. 279
Ochsenkühn, S. 102
Oehl, M. 189
Oestermeier, U. 181
Oettingen, G. 250
O'Hora, D. 190
Olivers, C.N. 207
Olschowski, P. 213
Omerzu, T. 190
Opitz, B. 240
Orscheschek, F. 191
Orsi, G. 53
Ortlieb, M. 25
Ortlieb, S.A. 191
Ossandón, J.P. 264
Öttl, A. 192
Öttl, B. 291
Ovalle Fresa, R. 192, 217
Pachalli, T. 193
Pachur, T. 141, 153, 193, 304
Padke, S. 194
Paelecke, M. 81
Palazova, M. 194
Papenmeier, F. 172, 195, 267
Pärsch, N. 195
Pastötter, B. 196
Paulun, V.C. 133, 163, 196
Paulus, A. 70
Pazen, M. 197
Pekrun, R. 158
Perlaki, G. 53
Pessach, D. 197
Peterlein, C. 57
Peters, B. 52, 73, 198
Pfeuffer, C. 198
Pfister, R. 75, 132, 147, 290, 295
Philipp, A. 49
Pieczykolan, A. 114, 199
Pietrowsky, R. 35
Pietsch, S. 199
Pimpini, L. 25
Pittino, F. 79, 200
Pittrich, K. 239
Pleskac, T.J. 16, 153, 242
Plessow, F. 138
Poeppel, D. 81
Pohr, C. 200
Poljac, E. 73
Pollmann, S. 207
Polzien, A. 201
Pomp, J. 115
Popp, M. 201
Posten, A. 271

313

Author index
Poth, C.H. 111, 202
Prager, J. 202
Prokott, K.E. 203
Pryslopska, A. 203
Pugnaghi, G. 204
Pulvermüller, F. 96
Pum, K. 89
Quevedo Pütter, J. 31
Raab, M. 204
Rabovsky, M. 23
Radev, S. 171
Radüntz, T. 239
Raettig, T. 205, 212
Rahlenbeck, M. 140
Rahm, B. 52, 73, 198
Rahona López, J.J. 128
Ralph-Nearman, C. 292
Ramezanpour, H. 138
Rausch, M. 205
Rebitschek, F.G. 206
Redlich, D. 206
Reeder, R.R. 207
Rees, J. 207
Reibke, J. 269
Reich, L. 97
Reichenbach, A. 208
Reimer, C.B. 208
Reinhard, R. 264
Reinisch, E. 158
Reinprecht, K. 209
Reiser, J.E. 209
Reissland, J. 41, 210
Reuschenbach, M. 210
Reuss, H. 211, 270
Révész, G. 121
Rey, G. 69, 157, 174, 295
Rey-Mermet, A. 211
Rickard, T. 191
Riechelmann, E. 212
Rieger, J.W. 212
Rieger, M. 22, 213
Rieger, T. 176
Ries, F. 213
Rieskamp, J. 16, 288
Rinas, R. 194
Ritter, H. 182
Robaina Fernández, M. 173
Roche, F. 214, 266
Röer, J.P. 27, 214
Roesch, S. 215
Rohleder, N. 26
Rohr, L. 13
Rohr, M. 76
Röhrdanz, N. 215

314

Roland, T. 121
Rolfs, M. 245
Rolke, B. 135, 216, 247
Rose, S. 23
Röser, F. 129, 216, 280
Rösler, F. 130
Roth, J. 107
Roth, M. 217
Rothen, N. 192, 217
Rothermund, K. 238
Rothe-Wulf, A. 218
Röthlisberger, M. 218
Röttger, E. 83, 219, 287, 303
Rück, F. 219
Rudolf, K. 187
Ruessmann, J.K. 220
Ruge, H. 220
Ruiz Fernández, S. 128
Rummel, J. 221, 257
Rummer, R. 272
Runge, Y. 221
Rüsseler, J. 222
Rutter, L. 33
Sabah, K. 222
Sachse, P. 154, 165, 166
Sack, O.S. 95
Said, N. 223
Sanwald, S. 223
Sassenhagen, J. 59, 81, 107, 224
Schaadt, G. 300
Schacht, A. 194
Schack, T. 47, 98, 136, 224, 243, 253
Schäfer, J. 260
Schäfer, S. 225
Schapansky, E. 35
Schaper, M. 226
Scharf, S.E. 226
Scharinger, C. 148, 227
Scharlau, I. 143, 270
Scheer, M. 48
Schegner, L. 36
Scheibehenne, B. 141, 227
Scheil, J. 228
Schenk, T. 150
Schepens, J.J. 228
Scherbaum, S. 94, 131, 229, 236, 245,
249, 277
Scherer, D. 229
Schewe, F. 230
Schilling, T. 230
Schimpf, N. 282
Schindler, S. 231
Schlegelmilch, R. 231
Schliewe, C. 187

Author index
Schloßmacher, I. 232
Schlotz, W. 170
Schlüter, H. 232
Schmalfuß, F. 162
Schmid, A.C. 16
Schmidt, F. 178, 196, 233
Schmidt, J.R. 233
Schmidts, C. 234
Schmitz, F. 234
Schneider, C. 235
Schneider, D. 22, 235
Schneider, W.X. 76, 202
Schnitzler, A. 32
Schnuerch, M. 236
Schnürch, R. 141, 204, 206
Schoemann, M. 94, 131, 236, 249
Scholz, A. 134
Scholz, S. 237
Schonard, C. 235
Schönfeldt-Lecuona, C. 223
Schöpper, L. 237
Schorn, R. 238
Schrater, P. 14
Schreckenbach, F.A. 238
Schröder, F. 239
Schroeder, C. 64
Schroeder, S. 239
Schubert, A. 92, 281
Schubert, M. 136
Schubert, P. 20
Schubert, S. 296
Schubert, T. 144, 164, 191, 208, 227, 240
Schuberth, S. 25
Schubö, A. 13, 27, 29, 59, 82, 112, 297
Schuch, S. 240
Schug, S. 241
Schul, K. 288
Schülke, R. 261
Schulte-Mecklenbeck, M. 103, 241
Schultz, J. 242
Schulze, C. 242
Schumacher, P.B. 154
Schurer, T.R. 240
Schütz, A.C. 89, 90, 116, 118, 259, 284,
297
Schütz, C. 97, 136, 243
Schütz, I. 65
Schütz-Bosbach, S. 126
Schwab, M. 135
Schwanecke, U. 202
Schwarz, K.A. 132, 290
Schwarzer, G.
55, 57, 85, 86, 125, 139, 249,
276
Schwarzkopp, T. 125

Schween, R. 150, 243
Schweer, B. 244, 263
Schweitzer, J. 244
Schweitzer, R. 245
Schwenke, D. 245
Schwippert, S. 150
Seegelke, C. 246
Seelig, S.A. 246
Seer, C. 258
Seibold, J.C. 247
Seibold, V.C. 149, 216, 247
Seib-Pfeifer, L. 248
Selen, L. 129, 248
Senftleben, U. 249
Senkowski, D. 128
Sensoy, Ö. 249
Serra, Q. 250
Sevincer, T. 250
Shahal, A. 251
Shaki, S. 74
Sherman, J.W. 26
Shevchenko, Y. 109
Siehl, S. 251
Sierk, A. 251
Sim, E. 252
Simon, O. 51, 168
Singh, T. 252
Singmann, H. 253, 293
Sinner, K. 26
Sionti, M. 253
Sklarek, B. 254
Söllner, A. 40
Soutschek, A. 227
Speekenbrink, M. 190
Spektor, M.S. 254
Spence, C. 45, 123, 171
Spengler, M. 272
Spivey, M.J. 71
Sprengel, M. 255
Sprenger, S. 255
Stahl, C. 20, 112
Stahl, J. 276
Starr, G.G. 276
Stefani, M. 256
Stehlau, S. 134
Stein, M. 36
Steinborn, M.B. 149, 256
Steindorf, L. 257
Steines, M. 33, 257
Steingroever, H. 193
Steinhauser, M. 68, 102, 163, 300
Steinke, A. 258
Stephan, D.N. 73, 258
Sternad, D. 259

315

Author index
Sterzer, P. 111
Stewart, E.E. 259
Stimm, D. 260
Stöckigt, G. 122
Stoeger, H. 215
Stoll, T. 260
Strack, F. 142
Straub, E. 261
Straube, B. 33, 104, 197, 257, 261
Straube, T. 55, 217, 232
Strauch, C. 95, 262
Strickrodt, M. 262
Strobach, T. 144, 179, 191
Stroth, S. 18
Strozyk, J. 193, 263
Stumpen, H. 244, 263
Stürmer, B. 194
Suarez Ramirez, P. 25
Suggate, S. 215
Suljic, K. 264
Sulpizio, S. 44
Sülzenbrück, S. 265
Sutter, C. 95, 244, 263, 265
Tamura, H. 203
Taylor, J.A. 243
Teige-Mocigemba, S. 26
Teixeira, C. 50
Telatar, E. 264
Tempel, T. 221
Tettamanti, M. 25
Theeuwes, J. 8
Thiemann, M. 265
Thier, P. 138
Thies, B. 99
Thomaschke, R. 64, 176
Thönes, S. 265, 304
Thüring, M. 214, 266
Tiede, K. 266
Tiffin-Richards, S.P. 239
Timm, J.D. 267
Töllner, T. 267
Tomat, M. 268
Topolinski, S. 220
Topp, L. 268
Toscano, J.C. 71
Trahms, C. 251
Trapp, A.K. 269
Trapp, S. 269
Trehub, S. 55
Troje, N.F. 148, 277
Trumpp, N.M. 270
Tschech, K. 285
Tschense, M. 276
Tünnermann, J. 270

316

Turati, C. 289
Turowski, B. 25
Ugurlar, P. 271
Uhlig, M. 277
Uhlmann, L. 271
Ulbrich, P. 272
Ullrich, S. 272
Undorf, M. 40, 273, 305
Unkelbach, C. 17, 84
Unni, A. 212
Urbas, L. 36
Utz, S. 179
Vallesi, A. 273
Valsecchi, M. 274
Valuch, C. 274
van der Meer, E. 300
Van Dessel, P. 269
van Kemenade, B. 139, 261, 275
van Steenbergen, H. 275
Ventura-Bort, C. 74
Vesker, M. 276
Vessel, E.A. 276
Veto, P. 277
Võ, M.L. 59, 293
Voelcker-Rehage, C. 286
Vogel, D. 277
Vogel, T. 15
Vogelpohl, T. 278
Volk, G. 272
Vollrath, M. 117, 230, 278, 294
Volz-Sidiropoulou, E. 279
von Castell, C. 279, 290
von der Burchard, L. 280
von Georgi, R. 37
von Helversen, B. 16, 24, 114, 231
von Heydebreck, M. 280
von Kalckreuth, N. 269
von Krause, M. 281
von Luxburg, U. 172
von Salm, S. 188
von Sydow, M. 281
Voormann, A. 282
Voracek, M. 43
Voss, A. 42, 153, 171, 281, 282
Voudouris, D. 283
Vujosevic, D. 137
Vukelic, M. 283
Wagner, I. 284
Wagner, V. 170
Wahl, S. 230
Walle, A. 284
Wallot, S. 285
Wänke, M. 15
Wardhani, I. 167

Author index
Wascher, E. 22, 127, 235, 304
Waszak, F. 198
Weber, P. 39
Weber, S. 285
Weber, T. 286
Wechsler, K. 286
Weckwerth, C. 287
Wegmann, E. 287
Weigelt, M. 97, 140, 201, 288
Weiland-Breckle, H. 154
Weilbächer, R.A. 288
Weinreich, L. 289
Weise, L. 289
Weller, L. 132, 147, 290
Welsch, R. 290
Wendebourg, K. 291
Wendt, M. 88, 255, 268, 291
Wengemuth, E. 82
Wenmackers, S. 253
Wentura, D. 76, 225, 229, 294
Wesslein, A. 244
Weyer, T. 120
Weymar, M. 74
Widenhorn-Müller, K. 223
Wiebking, C. 292
Wiegelmann, M. 226
Wienrich, C. 269, 292
Wienß, E. 182
Wiersema, R. 269
Wiesmann, S. 293
Wiley, J. 53
Wilhelm, O. 234
Willems, T. 242
Willenbockel, V. 293
Williams, J. 53
Willing, S. 56
Willrodt, U. 117
Winiger, S. 293
Winkler, S. 294

Wirth, B.E. 294
Wirth, R. 75, 295
Wirzberger, M. 69, 295
Wiswede, D. 222
Witte, O. 135
Wittsack, H. 25
Witzel, C. 296
Witzlack, C. 296
Woirgardt, M. 297
Wolf, C. 297
Wolf, E. 213, 298
Wolff, F. 204
Wolpert, D. M. 9
Wong-Lin, K. 190
Wortelen, B. 72
Wühr, P. 298
Wulff, D.U. 103, 254, 299
Wulff, L. 299
Wurm, F. 300
Wyrobnik, M. 300
Yan, C. 47
Yan, F. 301
Zabicki, A. 185, 301
Zander, S. 302
Zehetleitner, M. 205
Zerweck, I. 302
Zgonnikov, A. 190
Zhang, J. 303
Zhang, M. 119
Zhao, F. 83, 121, 219, 287, 303
Zickerick, B. 304
Zilker, V. 304
Zimdahl, M.F. 305
Zimmer, H. 58
Zimmermann, K.M. 18
Zöller, A.C. 305
Zsidó, A.N. 53, 121, 306
Zürn, M. 271, 306

317

