International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences, 6(4) 2019, Pages: 95-100

Contents lists available at Science-Gate

International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences
Journal homepage: http://www.science-gate.com/IJAAS.html

Autonomous wheelchair under a predefined environment
Anbuselvi Mathivanan *, Saravanan Palani
Department of ECE, SSN College of Engineering, Tamilnadu, India

ARTICLE INFO

ABSTRACT

Article history:
Received 23 June 2018
Received in revised form
25 January 2019
Accepted 13 February 2019

This research work proposes a prototype of low-cost smart wheelchair
design. The significance of this model of the wheelchair is to move
autonomously around a known environment, following a definite path.
Existing systems include control action using a joystick, voice recognition,
head movements, and eye motion. However, these systems include
limitations in terms of operating complexity, the environment in which it is
used and cost. Most importantly, the limitation of the existing system is the
need for the continuous effort of the user in controlling the wheelchair.
Hence, this work targets to aid the physically challenged persons to have
improved mobility without much of human effort. An automatic wheelchair
model is proposed that empowers navigation without continuous steering of
a wheelchair by the user in a known environment. The model includes a set
of sensors, infrared, ultrasonic, RFID reader and tags. The other significant
components are the compass module, ATmega microcontroller, and motors.
This system was designed and developed to enable low cost, reduced time
and effort of the user. This paper provides a comprehensive overview of the
design and validation of the autonomous wheelchair system. Further, the
sophistication towards the GPS enabled autonomous system could be
extended, which works well in different new environments.

Keywords:
Autonomous system
Wheelchair
Predefined map

© 2019 The Authors. Published by IASE. This is an open access article under the CC
BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction

an automatic wheelchair that can move in a known
environment with less human effort.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows; a
brief discussion of related work is presented in
section 2. The proposed system design is detailed in
section 3. The approach of robotics planning and
control is described in section 4. The implementation
of the proposed system is presented in section 5.

This paper is conceived as an idea to ease the
lives of those among us who are unfortunate enough
to have lost the ability to move their legs due to a
significant amount of paralysis, accident or due to
old age. In order to provide assistance to this
population, robotic and intelligent system
technologies have been used to design an
autonomous wheelchair. The existing electric
wheelchairs are mostly based on joystick control.
There are electric wheelchairs based on finger
movement tracking in which flex sensors are used,
voice recognition based system for end users who
have lost control of upper body parts, eye movement
based and EMG based wheelchair. These have
limitations in terms of operating complexity, noisy
environment and cost. The steering of the
wheelchair is controlled by the user and the user
always needs to be vigilant. Thereby, the proposed
system mitigates the existing limitations by creating
*

2. Related works
The objective of this research work is to equip the
present wheelchair control system with a keypad
command system at low-price and friendly operation
with proper safety measures. With these features,
differently abled people especially with a severe
disability will be able to move independently.
Prototypes of several smart wheelchairs have been
developed, based on advanced technology. The
navigation problem of mobile robots has been
treated in Nara and Takahashi (2006), such that
obstacles are avoided using vision information. In
the method used, obstacles were detected (which
were present in front of a mobile robot) by
calculating the optical flow, after which the optimal
trajectory for a robot was decided based on the area
of detection. Here, data from the sensors was used to
support a vision system. In order to find the optimal

* Corresponding Author.
Email Address: anbuselvim@ssn.edu.in (A. Mathivanan)
https://doi.org/10.21833/ijaas.2019.04.011
Corresponding author's ORCID profile:
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9541-9856
2313-626X/© 2019 The Authors. Published by IASE.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

95

Anbuselvi Mathivanan, Saravanan Palani /International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences, 6(4) 2019, Pages: 95-100

trajectory, the distance between a mobile robot and
obstacle was computed using a function.
In order to realize the autonomic movement of
the mobile robot, obstacle detection and obstacle
avoidance were proposed. As for the obstacle
detection, the image of the detected obstacle with
the distance information was formed by the fusion of
information from the camera and ultrasonic sensors.
As for the obstacle avoidance, trajectory generation
(positive and negative trajectories were generated
whose curvatures were calculated and subsequently
minimized) and trajectory tracking were used.
Smart driving assistance algorithms were used to
support the operator of an automated wheelchair in
complex navigational situations in Rofer et al.
(2009). On the basis of an empirical study in which
eight untrained subjects performed a given course
using a conventional joystick and a proportional
head-joystick respectively, the benefits resulting
from the application of a newly developed driving
assistance module were proved. Altering the
translational and rotational velocities in situations
where an obstacle blocks the user-commanded way,
the driving assistance module significantly improved
driver-performance by preventing all collisions
along the way.
The first important issue in this paper was that
almost all subjects were able to navigate the
wheelchair quite well after a minimal training phase
of no more than five minutes. Even if the average
time of travel and the driven distance increased for
test runs incorporating driving assistance, the
number of collisions dropped to zero. The increase in
travel time and driven distance is only significant in
tight navigation situations. In situations without
obstacles, both measures were not impeded by the
assistance module.
Rechy-Ramirez et al. (2012) presented a userfriendly Human Machine Interface (HMI) for handsfree control of an Electric Powered Wheelchair
(EPW). Its two operation modes were based on head
movements: Mode 1 uses only one head movement
to give the commands, and Mode 2 employs four
head movements. In both control modes, the user
does not have to maintain the head movement
during the control command. An EEG device, namely
Emotiv EPOC, had been deployed in this HMI to
obtain the head movement information of users
without the need of a camera.
Ruíz-Serrano et al. (2014) proposed a real-time
obstacle avoidance embedded system adapted to
work with a multimodal navigation interface. 26
Ultrasonic sensors (Sonars) were used to provide
feedback of the distance between the wheelchair and
the obstacles. Interfaces that allow a more natural
interaction with a wheelchair were created. The
proposed multimodal interface integrated four
control methods: a voice control interface using a
microphone, a magnetic control system using a
magnet, a joystick and a control pad that it can
perform a simple command control with the basic
moves to drive the wheelchair. Ultrasonic sensors
were used to prevent accidents and stop the

wheelchair if this was directed against an obstacle by
mistake. Moreover a speaker was programmed to
beep with certain proximity to avoid a collision.
Simpson and Levine (2002) proposed a solution
to utilize voice control in combination with the
navigation
assistance
provided
by
“smart
wheelchairs,” which use sensors to identify and
avoid obstacles in the wheelchair’s path. This paper
describes an experiment that compares the
performance of able-bodied subjects using voice
control to operate a power wheelchair both with and
without navigation assistance. The voice control
system described in this paper was implemented
within the NavChair Assistive Wheelchair Navigation
System. The NavChair was being developed to
provide mobility to those individuals who would
otherwise find it difficult or impossible to operate a
power wheelchair. The NavChair was chosen for this
project because the navigation assistance it provides
to the user makes it possible to ensure the user’s
safety while limiting the amount of interaction
required between the user and the wheelchair.
3. Proposed system
Undoubtedly, industrial automation application is
one of the key issues in developing RFID technology.
The utilization of RFID technology is novel and might
enhance the existed automation system. A RFID and
Line follower based autonomous wheelchair is
designed and implemented in this paper for more
extensively application of RFID systems. The
Arduino based Microcontroller of Microchip ATmega
2560 is used to control the proposed autonomous
mobile robot and to communicate with RFID reader.
Due to the uniqueness of RFID tag, the moving
control commands such as turn right, turn left, speed
up and speed down etc. The autonomous mobile
robot can read the moving control commands from
the tags and accomplish the proper actions. It also
has IR sensors attached which makes used of line
follower concept. The novel localization system for a
mobile robot through RFID tags and line follower is
proposed to improve the efficiency of the system.
4. System architecture
In this work, Arduino ATmega microprocessor is
chosen as an intelligent controller.
Fig. 1 shows the major components of the
proposed system design. For the sensor part,
ultrasonic sensors will be attached to measure the
distance from any obstacle within the detectable
range.
Fig. 2 shows the hardware pin connections of the
set of components with the controller. Wheel
encoder and compass are included to keep track of
direction and movements. RFID for efficient
maneuver at turns and steep corners it is also used
for localization and directional control.
IR sensors send a HIGH output when it senses
white and a LOW output when it senses black, to the
controller. The row and column pins of the matrix
96

Anbuselvi Mathivanan, Saravanan Palani /International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences, 6(4) 2019, Pages: 95-100

keypad are connected to the digital pins of the
Arduino. RFID reader transmits the tag value via
serial communication of the controller. Then the
controller generates a trigger signal and sends to the
ultrasonic sensor. Based on the presence of an
obstacle, the controller receives an echo signal
within a timeout. Compass module uses I2C to
communicate with the controller. Based on the
inputs obtained from IR sensors, ultrasonic sensors,
RFID Reader, compass module and keypad, the
controller sends command to the motor driver,
which controls the direction of movement of the
motors.

and Radio modules (915 MHz, 13.56 MHz and 125
KHz). The PCB mounted diagram of typical RFID
reader consists of two processors these are DSP and
N/W processors. DSP deals with the radio frequency
signals.
The other circuitry is also shown in the Fig. 3.
There is a coil antenna which is quit big in size with
other components. This antenna is used for radio
wave transmission.

Fig. 3: Concepts of RFID-based autonomous wheelchair

There are many different versions of RFID that
operate at different radio frequencies. Three primary
frequency bands have been allocated for RFID:

Fig. 1: Proposed system design

1. Low Frequency (125/134 KHz) – Most commonly

used for access control and asset tracking.

2. Mid-Frequency (13.56 MHz) – Used where

medium data rate and read ranges are required.
3. Ultra-High Frequency (850 MHz to 950 MHz and

2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz) – offer the longest read range.

For a case, with the Fig. 4, while the robot moves
to tag 1 and receives the commands of turn left and
speed up, then the controller will make some control
actions to let the robot conform the commands.
While the robot moves to tag 2, the commands to go
straight and slow down were received, the controller
will once again make some control actions to let the
robot conform the commands. Therefore, the robot
will then move in moving path 1 automatically. Of
course, the robot can also move in the other paths
according to the commands received from tags.
The system consists of a microchip and an
antenna. Attached to an object to be tracked (vary in
size) Stores information about the object
Read/Write or Read Only. Contact less, line of sight
not required. Read Range: few inches if passive to
hundreds of feet if active.

Fig. 2: PIN out connection

The sequences of action taken by the controller
are as follows:
Interpret sensor data.
Plan a path to its goal destination.
Localize itself in the world.
Plan a local path to reach the next waypoint in the
defined route.
 Execute local path.
 Avoid hitting obstacles of any kind.





4.1. System components
It is used to power up the tag. It established
Bidirectional data link. It can communicate with
network server. Inventory tags and filter results. It
can read 100 to 300 tags per tag. These readers can
be fixed or mobile type. A typical reader generally
includes Digital Signal Processor, Network Processor

Fig. 4: Driving environment with RF tags and line follower

97

Anbuselvi Mathivanan, Saravanan Palani /International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences, 6(4) 2019, Pages: 95-100

The ATmega 2560 is a low power CMOS 8-bit
microcontroller based on AVR enhanced RISC
architecture. By executing powerful instructions in a
single clock cycle ATmega 2560 achieves a
throughput of 1 MIPS per MHz allowing the system
designed to optimize power consumption versus
processing speed.
Arduino Mega 2560 is based on the
microcontroller ATmega2560. It has 54 digital
input/output pins (of which 15 can be used as PWM
outputs), 16 analog inputs, 4 UARTs (hardware serial
ports), a 16 MHz crystal oscillator, a USB connection,
a power jack, an ICSP header, and a reset button. It
can be connected to a computer with a USB cable or
can be powered using an AC-to-DC adapter or
battery.
This serves as a useful human interface
component. Matrix keypads are used as it reduces
the number of pins required to interface the keypad
buttons with a microcontroller. For example – In a
4X4 matrix keypad only 8 pins are needed to read 16
digital outputs. Similarly for 10X10 matrix keypad
only 20 pins are required to read 100 digital outputs.
It is an electronic device that emits infrared rays
in order to the surroundings. The emitter is an IR
LED and the detector is an IR Photodiode which is
sensitive to IR light of the same wavelength as that
emitted by the IR LED. When IR light falls on the
photodiode, the resistances and output voltages,
change in proportion to the magnitude of the IR light
received.
The transmitter transmits IR rays continuously.
The output terminal of the receiver varies depending
on the magnitude of IR light received. Since this
variation cannot be analyzed as such, this output is
fed to a comparator circuit.
The comparator used is LM358, shown in Fig. 5.
When the receiver does not receive any signal, the
potential at the inverting input goes higher than the
non-inverting input of the comparator IC. Thus the
output of the comparator goes low, hence the
indicator LED does not glow. When the receiver
receives signal, the potential at the inverting input
goes low. Thus the output of the comparator goes
high and the LED glows. Resistors are used to ensure
that a minimum of 10 mA current passes through the
LED and photodiode.
This evaluates the attributes of a target by
interpreting the echoes which are above the audible
frequency range of human beings and operates at 40
KHz, shown in Fig. 6. The transmitter emits a high
frequency pulse for a short duration of time. After
receiving the signal, the properties of the signal are
evaluated.
In reflection mode (also known as “echo
ranging”), an ultrasonic transmitter emits a short
burst of sound in a particular direction, as shown in
Fig. 7.
The pulse bounces off a target and returns to the
receiver after a time interval t. The receiver records
the length of this time interval, and calculates the
distance travelled r based on the speed of sound c as

(1)

𝑟 = 𝑐 ∗ 𝑡 ⁄2.

Digital compass module combines 2-axis
magneto-resistive sensors with the required analog
and digital support circuits, and algorithms for
heading computation. It helps in providing directions
(N, S, E, W) for navigation.

Fig. 5: Infrared sensor module and internal circuit

Fig. 6: HCSR04 ultrasonic sensor

Fig. 7: Time of flight measurement of Ultrasonic Sensor

Fig. 8 shows HMC5883L, digital compass which
includes state-of-theart, high-resolution HMC118X
series magneto-resistive sensors plus an ASIC
containing amplification, automatic degaussing strap
drivers, offset cancellation, and a 12-bit ADC that
enables 1° to 2° compass heading accuracy. I2C serial
bus allows for easy interface.
The HMC5883L is a 3.0x3.0x0.9mm surface
mount 16-pin leadless chip carrier (LCC).
Applications for the HMC5883L include Mobile
Phones, Netbooks, Consumer Electronics, Auto
Navigation Systems, and Personal Navigation Device.
In any electric motor, operation is based on
simple electromagnetism. A current-carrying
conductor generates a magnetic field; when this is
then placed in an external magnetic field, it will
98

Anbuselvi Mathivanan, Saravanan Palani /International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences, 6(4) 2019, Pages: 95-100

experience a force proportional to the current in the
conductor, and to the strength of the external
magnetic field. As you are well aware of from playing
with magnets as a kid, opposite (North and South)
polarities attract while like polarities (North and
North, South and South) repel.

mark along the path containing required directional
control for the bot. The identified vital components
of the proposed systems are integrated to develop a
complete model. Fig. 9 shows the front view of the
complete prototype developed, depicting the
position of the sensor units and their connectivity.
Similarly Fig. 10 shows the rear view of the
prototype developed.

Fig. 8: Digital Compass (HMCS5883L)

Fig. 9: IR sensors and ultrasonic sensor placed in front of
wheelchair model

The internal configuration of a DC motor is
designed to harness the magnetic interaction
between a current-carrying conductor and an
external magnetic field to generate rotational
motion. Let's start by looking at a simple 2-pole DC
electric motor (here red represents a magnet or
winding with a "North" polarization, while green
represents a magnet or winding with a "South"
polarization).
5. Implementation
Map of a known environment is drawn by using
black lines and each destination is assigned a
number. Two RFID tags are fixed on the path. For
line detection logic, IR Sensors are used, which
consists of IR LED and Photodiode. They are placed
in a reflective way i.e., side–by–side so that
whenever they come in to proximity of a reflective
surface, the light emitted by IR LED will be detected
by Photo diode. As the reflectance of the light
colored surface is high, the infrared light emitted by
IR LED will be maximum reflected and will be
detected by the Photodiode. In case of black surface,
which has a low reflectance, the light gets completely
absorbed by the black surface and doesn’t reach the
photodiode. When the robot moves forward, both
the sensors wait for the line to be detected. For
example, if the IR Sensor 1 in the above image
detects the black line, it means that there is a right
curve (or turn) ahead. Arduino UNO detects this
change and sends signal to motor driver accordingly.
In order to turn right, the motor on the right side of
the robot is slowed down using PWM, while the
motor on the left side is run at normal speed. RFID
tag are placed on the line so that it can keep track of
the wheelchair and provide suitable information. Tag
of RFID also acts as waypoints which help in
navigation through the defined environment. Based
on the source and destination selection, a path is
selected within the defined environment with RFID’s

Fig. 10: Wheelchair model with the keypad

6. Conclusion
The wheelchair model that has been built, can
move from one node to another based on inputs
given from a keypad, avoid stationary obstacles and
follow a line. The line following concept has been
used purely for achieving straight movement. The
limitation of constant vigilance on the part of the
user has been mitigated in the proposed model.
Furthermore, PID controller along with a feedback
loop can be used to control speeds of the motors
such that the motors run at equal speeds.
Acknowledgment
The authors acknowledge the support provided
by Ms. N. Srividya, Ms. K. Sruthi and Ms. N. Soniya
(Alumni of SSN College of engineering) for their
contribution for the successful completion of this
work.
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
99

Anbuselvi Mathivanan, Saravanan Palani /International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences, 6(4) 2019, Pages: 95-100
Rehabilitation Robotics, IEEE, Kyoto, Japan: 743-748.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICORR.2009.5209506

References
Nara S and Takahashi S (2006). Obstacle avoidance control for
mobile robots based on vision. In the International Joint
Conference SICE-ICASE, IEEE, Busan, South Korea: 5335-5338.
https://doi.org/10.1109/SICE.2006.315455

Ruíz-Serrano A, Reyes-Fernández MC, Posada-Gómez R, MartínezSibaja A, and Aguilar-Lasserre AA (2014). Obstacle avoidance
embedded system for a smart wheelchair with a multimodal
navigation interface. In the 11th International Conference on
Electrical Engineering, Computing Science and Automatic
Control, IEEE, Mexico, North America: 1-6.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEEE.2014.6978290

Rechy-Ramirez EJ, Hu H, and McDonald-Maier K (2012). Head
movements based control of an intelligent wheelchair in an
indoor environment. In the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Biomimetics, IEEE, Guangzhou, China: 14641469.
https://doi.org/10.1109/ROBIO.2012.6491175

Simpson RC and Levine SP (2002). Voice control of a powered
wheelchair. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, 10(2): 122-125.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSRE.2002.1031981
PMid:12236450

Rofer T, Mandel C, and Laue T (2009). Controlling an automated
wheelchair via joystick/head-joystick supported by smart
driving assistance. In the IEEE International Conference on

100

