New Jersey Institute of Technology

Digital Commons @ NJIT
Dissertations

Theses and Dissertations

Summer 2017

The use of audio stimulation to affect sensorimotor learning
Gregory Nicholas Ranky
New Jersey Institute of Technology

Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.njit.edu/dissertations
Part of the Biomedical Engineering and Bioengineering Commons

Recommended Citation
Ranky, Gregory Nicholas, "The use of audio stimulation to affect sensorimotor learning" (2017).
Dissertations. 39.
https://digitalcommons.njit.edu/dissertations/39

This Dissertation is brought to you for free and open access by the Theses and Dissertations at Digital Commons
@ NJIT. It has been accepted for inclusion in Dissertations by an authorized administrator of Digital Commons @
NJIT. For more information, please contact digitalcommons@njit.edu.

Copyright Warning & Restrictions
The copyright law of the United States (Title 17, United
States Code) governs the making of photocopies or other
reproductions of copyrighted material.
Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and
archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other
reproduction. One of these specified conditions is that the
photocopy or reproduction is not to be “used for any
purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research.”
If a, user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or
reproduction for purposes in excess of “fair use” that user
may be liable for copyright infringement,
This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a
copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of the order
would involve violation of copyright law.
Please Note: The author retains the copyright while the
New Jersey Institute of Technology reserves the right to
distribute this thesis or dissertation
Printing note: If you do not wish to print this page, then select
“Pages from: first page # to: last page #” on the print dialog screen

The Van Houten library has removed some of the
personal information and all signatures from the
approval page and biographical sketches of theses
and dissertations in order to protect the identity of
NJIT graduates and faculty.

ABSTRACT
THE USE OF AUDIO STIMULATION
TO AFFECT SENSORIMOTOR LEARNING
by
Gregory Nicholas Ranky
Sensorimotor learning for the hand and fingers can be conducted using both hardware
and software components, but the training regime is also important. Using repetitive
sequence tapping allows measurement of defined metrics in a controlled, safe
environment, and therefore statistical indications for subject improvement.
The process of entrainment, when a subject’s own movements synchronize to an
external signal, has been tested in prior studies for memorization and recognition, but has
not been investigated for correlation with sensorimotor learning.
This is tested with selected custom isochronic audio tones, combined with
sequential finger tapping on a standard computer keyboard.
Whilst there were no significant differences between specific frequencies, testing
blocks done during tone conditions show subject improvement in reduced mean sequence
times compared to pre-stimulation, with no significant change in subsequent poststimulation blocks.

THE USE OF AUDIO STIMULATION
TO AFFECT SENSORIMOTOR LEARNING

by
Gregory Nicholas Ranky

A Dissertation
Submitted to the Faculty of
New Jersey Institute of Technology
and Rutgers University Biomedical and Health Sciences – Newark
in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Philosophy in Biomedical Engineering
Department of Biomedical Engineering
August 2017

Copyright © 2017 by Gregory Nicholas Ranky
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
.

APPROVAL PAGE
THE USE OF AUDIO STIMULATION
TO AFFECT SENSORIMOTOR LEARNING
Gregory Nicholas Ranky

Dr. Sergei Adamovich, Thesis Advisor
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering, NJIT

Date

Dr. Judith E. Deutsch, Committee Member
Date
Professor and Director Rivers Lab, Department of Rehabilitation and Movement
Sciences, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences

Dr. Gerard Fluet, Committee Member
Date
Assistant Professor of Department of Rehabilitation and Movement Sciences, Rutgers
Biomedical and Health Sciences

Dr. Richard A. Foulds, Committee Member
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering, NJIT

Date

Dr. Mesut Sahin, Committee Member
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering, NJIT

Date

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

Author:

Gregory Nicholas Ranky

Degree:

Doctor of Philosophy

Date:

August 2017

Undergraduate and Graduate Education:
• Doctor of Philosophy in Biomedical Engineering,
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, 2017
• Master of Science in Biomedical Engineering,
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, 2010
• Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Engineering,
New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, 2005
Major:

Biomedical Engineering

Presentations and Publications:
Gregory N. Ranky, (2007) “Mobile robot sensor and networking design to enable
cooperative behavior,” Industrial Robot: An International Journal, Vol. 34, issue
1, 21-25.
Gregory N. Ranky and Paul G. Ranky, (2005) “Japanese prototype service robot R&D
trends and examples,” Industrial Robot: An International Journal, Vol. 32, issue
6, 460-464.

iv

It is difficult to predict the end result of focused, exploratory research, regardless of the
subject, and I’ve found that’s true for life as well. For in the words of the late, great Isaac
Asimov: ‘The most exciting phrase to hear in science, the one that heralds new
discoveries, is not 'Eureka!' (I've found it!), but 'That's funny’.
I expected when first going into this dissertation that I would make a grand
discovery, one that would change my field and inspire future work, and through the
course of this dissertation, I found both results that I had hoped for, and results that
surprised me and made me think.
Having just finished this and looking back at this moment, I can’t say right now
how beneficial my efforts were, as despite all my work I don’t know the full effects of
what I’ve done, and whether the results are significant enough for anyone to take notice
in the future, or to build on it further. But in all honesty, I’ve come to conclude that
every researcher, student or not, academic or not, has the belief that their work will be
grand at some point, and that it’s fine to believe in that possibility.
Over the past four years, I’ve spent not just time and money, but I’ve invested
much of my peace of mind and self-worth too; when this dissertation is over and done
with I want some of it back, as much as possible in fact. And whatever I won’t be able to
get back, I want to leave this work knowing that what I’ve traded for it is worthwhile.
But once again, it’s difficult to tell right now exactly what the end result will be.
What I can say however, is that I’ve experienced the key elements of research,
stepping forward with one foot into the unknown, testing out what you expect to see if it
is true outside of your own mind, and trying to convince others, many of whom you’ve
never met, that your efforts were worthwhile. Research has taught me that learning is

v

indeed life-long, far beyond the confines of the classroom, and that the answers we end
up having are rarely multiple choice, or simple enough to boil down into one pithy
sentence, like the ones I’m trying to include here.
For anyone who’s reading this dissertation, I advise you to think carefully about
what you’re planning to do with the degree you’ll earn from this, because work on this
scale will take space, time and peace of mind to accomplish. And if you do decide to
follow through, don’t be afraid to ask for help, because as insurmountable as it seems day
after day, it is possible to finish, even if you don’t find the results that you expected to.
In the end, your work can enrich the lives and understanding of those beyond you,
and if this work that you’re reading just now can do that for you, then I will consider my
efforts have been worthwhile.

vi

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to thank all of those who have assisted, supported, and inspired me during
my doctoral studies and the development of this dissertation. Dr. Sergei Adamovich,
thank you for your patience and methodical approach.

Dr. Judith Deutsch, your

enthusiasm is infectious in the best possible way, and I hope you enjoyed my work.
Dr. Gerard Fluet, I admit it was unfamiliar territory for me to ensure the health, safety
and dignity of those who participated in my work, and your guidance helped me
immensely. Dr. Richard Foulds, it was your teaching that convinced me to pursue
Biomedical Engineering as a major. Dr. Mesut Sahin, thank you for your willingness to
evaluate one of the lesser studied aspects of human sensorimotor behavior.
I am grateful to the NJIT Biomedical Department for accepting me into the
Doctoral Program, and for their collective insight in furthering my skillset and career
development,
I am also grateful to UMDNJ for expanding my knowledge of human anatomy
and physiology, to show me fields of study that I’d only glimpsed at previously.
I would like to thank Prasad Tendolkar for his assistance with EEG recording, and
especially MATLAB coding, you saved me so much time and effort in my work, and for
that you have my gratitude.
All those who volunteered for testing in my procedures, thank you for trusting me
to do everything properly, and for believing that my work was new, intriguing and fun,
and I hope my work has in turn inspired you.

vii

I would like to thank Dr. David Mitnick for his counseling and support during one
of the most frustrating and stressful periods of my life so far. Also my thanks to Shelly,
your suggestion for added analysis was a keen piece of insight and you’ve been a joy to
talk to.
I would like to thank everyone in the New York Film Academy March 2016 12week Evening Screenwriting Course: Ben Maraniss, Nick Yellen, Gavrielle Reyes, Mia
Burton, Gautham Adithya, Valerie Yawien, and Brandi Faherty. Being with all of you
truly let me feel like my opinions mattered again and that I could trust myself to finish
something that I started; I wish you all the best in life and I will treasure the time we all
spent together.
Finally, I would like to thank my family: my parents for their patience, love and
understanding, and my younger brother, Richard for his support.

viii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page

1 INTRODUCTION …............................………………..………………………..….

1

1.1 Objective …………...…............................………………..…………………....

1

1.2 Problem Statement …………….………….……………………………….…...

1

1.3 Background Information ……………………………………………………….

2

1.3.1 Consciousness and Attention Optimization ………………..……...…….

3

1.3.2 Cognitive Load Theory …………………………………………...…….

3

1.3.3 Neurofeedback and Audiovisual Entrainment ……………….………….

4

1.3.4 Optimal Frequencies for Movement ……………………….……………

8

1.3.5 Workplace Safety and Ergonomics ……………………………..……….

9

1.3.6 Significance ...……………………………..………….……...………….

9

2 9-HOLE PEG TEST ............................……………………………..………..…..….

11

2.1 Chapter Introduction …..……….………….…………………………………...

11

2.2 Established Upper Extremity Tests ……..……………………………………..

11

2.3 Modified 9-Hole Peg Test …………...…………………………..…………….

13

2.4 Results ………………………………………………………………...………..

15

2.5 Discussion ……………………………….……………….……………………

20

3 SINGLE FINGER TAPPING WITH FOUR TONES …………………....……..….

23

3.1 Chapter Introduction …..……….………...……………………………….…...

23

3.2 Tone Customization …..……….………….……………………………….…...

23

ix

TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Continued)
Chapter

Page

3.3 Finger Tapping for Evaluation …..……..….………………...…………….…...

25

3.4 Equipment and Metrics …..…….………….…………………………………...

25

3.5 Procedure …………………………………….………………………………..

27

3.6 Results ……………………………………..…………………………………..

28

3.7 Discussion …………………………………...………………………………....

30

4 SEQUENTIAL FINGER TAPPING WITH 2 TONES AND A FIXED

31

SEQUENCE ……………………………………………………………....……..….
4.1 Chapter Introduction …………………………..………………………………

31

4.2 Procedure ………………….………….………….………….………….………

32

4.3 Results …………..………….………….…..…….………….………….……...

36

4.4 Discussion ……..………….………….………….………….………….………

40

5 CONCLUSION .…………….…………………………………………….………...

45

APPENDIX A SEQUENTIAL FINGER TAPPING WITH 4 TONES AND A

47

FIXED SEQUENCE UNDER EEG …………………………………………………..
APPENDIX B MATLAB SOURCE CODE FOR DATA INPUT ……..……………..

53

REFERENCES ………………………………………………………………………...

58

x

LIST OF TABLES
Table

Page

1.1

Background on Entrainment via PubMed.………………………......………...….

5

1.2

Prior Entrainment Frequencies and Modality…………………………………….

6

2.1

Modified 9-Hole Peg Test………………………………………………………...

15

4.1

Means Table for Sequence Time Effect: Repetition…………...…………………

37

4.2

Means Table for Sequence Time Effect: Time…………………………………...

37

4.3

Means Table for Sequence Time Effect: Repetition*Time………………………

37

4.4

Means Table for Accuracy Effect: Gender * Music……………………………..

39

4.5

Means Table for Error States Effect: Time………………………………………

40

xi

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure

Page

2.1

The 9-hole peg test …………………..………………………………...………....

12

2.2

Protocol 1: main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. hand used …….……..…..

15

2.3

Protocol 1: interaction plot - completion time (s) vs. stimulus (Hz)*hand used

16

……………………………………………………………………………..….…..
2.4

Protocol 2: main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. stimulus (Hz) …………..

17

2.5

Protocol 2: main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. hand used …………..…..

18

2.6

Protocol 3: main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. hand used ………..……..

19

3.1

Phidget thin force sensor interface with usb port …..……………….........………

26

3.2

Main effects plot for mean tapping frequency (Hz) vs. stimulation ……..……...

29

4.1

Interaction plot for mean sequence time …………………………………………

38

4.2

Bonferroni comparison plot for mean sequence time ……………………………

38

4.3

Bonferroni comparison plot for total error states ………………………………...

40

A.1 The emotiv epoctm eeg headset. ………………………….…………...………….

47

A.2 The gmfp equation. …………...................................................................…...…..

48

A.3 Example of a topoplot. …………...…………………………………………..…..

49

xii

LIST OF SYMBOLS

X

Y

ADL

Activities of Daily Living

AVS

Audiovisual Stimulation

CBF

Cerebral Blood Flow

CLT

Cognitive Load Theory

EEG

Electroencephalography

EOG

Electrooculography

fMRI

Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging

fNIRS

Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy

FOT

Finger Oscillation Test

FTT

Finger Tapping Test

GFP

Global Field Power

GMFP

Global Mean Field Power

NT

No-Tone

OSHA

Occupational Safety and Health
Administration

STD

Standard Deviation

tACS

Transcranial Alternating Current Stimulation

xiii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION

1.1 Objective
The objective of this dissertation is to investigate the effects of isochronic audio tones on
upper extremity sensorimotor learning and activity, specifically to determine whether
these are primarily assistive, restrictive or negligible.

This was tested using

neurologically healthy typical subjects with normal or corrected to normal vision and
hearing, and no history of head trauma, seizures, or injuries or surgeries to the fingers,
hands or arms.
This was first tested using four evenly spaced audio tones based on prior art,
combined with the 9-Hole Peg Test, testing both the dominant and non-dominant hands.
Next, the same four tones were tested in combination with Thin Force sensors to
measure both mean tapping speed and a preset finger sequence with subjects’ nondominant hand.
Finally, two of the four tones were tested using a preset keyboard sequence with
subjects’ non-dominant hands.

1.2 Problem Statement
The goal of this study is to utilize isochronic audio frequencies to determine their effects
on upper extremity sensorimotor performance and learning. This was tested in adult
subjects without physical or neurological impairments by using established cognitive
tests and physiological measurements.

1

Despite the relative dearth of prior art in this testing of combinations of isochronic
audio tones and upper extremity sensorimotor activity, there are real-world and clinical
applications for the resulting work.

Specifically, any activity with repetitive upper

extremity movement may be assisted or hindered by external sounds, whether intended or
not, such as noise or vibration from surroundings.

This can assist by allowing

synchronization of movements, or hinder by distracting or interfering in a person’s
optimal rhythm. This has potential applications in both ergonomics and rehabilitation;
the full extent of which is not fully known.

1.3 Background Information
Because human working memory is limited, multiple cultures across the world have
independently developed physical and behavioral tools to aid in memorization. Amongst
the oldest and most widespread of these is the use of music and rhythm to encode
information for future use. As both music and dance contain repeating sound and motion
patterns, learning to play or keep time with music requires the practitioner to maintain
rhythms by using internal synchronization and body movements, whether in dance or
playing instruments.
A specific example of this involves the synchronization of brain activity to
external rhythmic stimuli, known as entrainment.

Historical examples of using

entrainment extend beyond the personal scale, such as the Hypogeum of Hal-Saflieni, a
subterranean structure on the island of Malta. Within one of the side chambers, known as
the Oracle Room, where reverberations could be induced, and chanting at a 110Hz
frequency has been found to induce a trance-like state in the speaker. As an aside, the

2

reverberations have been found only to occur at the frequency range of 95-120Hz, which
could only be produced by a male voice.
Whilst prior work has found that using entrainment in combination with
additional tasks has led to changes in recognition and memorization, the use of specific
patterns, tones and frequencies and their effects on brain activity and sensorimotor
learning however have had comparatively little study. In order to discuss entrainment, it
is necessary to distinguish it from the similar concepts of Flow and Cognitive Load
Theory.

1.3.1 Consciousness and Attention Optimization
The idea of a specific state of consciousness that optimizes learning and application was
also explored by Professor Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. He used the term Flow to refer to a
state where a person's abilities and skills are comparable to meeting the challenges of
presented tasks, with both greater than the levels of baseline daily activities. This is
found in both genders, multiple ages, professions and nationalities. All instances of Flow
that he discovered had common elements: feedback was immediate, goals were clear,
and the perception of time was less relevant (though there were exceptions with this last
element, such as in sprinting, where minimizing time spent was a goal).

1.3.2 Cognitive Load Theory
Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) was developed in the 1950s from the work of G.A. Miller,

3

then elaborated on in the 1980s by John Sweller; and posits that human working memory
is limited, and therefore requires organizing input in order to make full use of it.
CLT provides an estimate of the maximum units of information that humans can
process in a given amount of time at seven 'chunks' of information, with a gap of 1/18th
of a second, giving 126 bits per second per person max, though this can be affected by
distractors or fatigue (Sweller and Van Merrienboer, 2009). The concept of Flow agrees
with CLT, in that human working memory is limited, and is subdivided into three types
of load:

task complexity, task presentation, task learning process.

Given these

conditions, there exists the possibility of a methodology or set of quantified elements that
can achieve this state in order to thoroughly and consistently develop specific skills, even
within the limits of human working memory.
The reason for this has been proposed to be a function of the brain’s memory
processing (Lisman, 2013). In this hypothesis, short-term memories are continuously
refreshed to maintain their presence, at a rate of 30-100Hz, whilst long-term memories
are refreshed at approximately 4-7Hz. Given these constraints, a short-term memory can
cycle approximately seven times for each long-term refresh cycle.

Whilst this has

similarities to Flow, the primary difference is that CLT is used to analyze and optimize
learning at an intellectual level, whilst Flow concerns itself with application and the
overall state of participant consciousness. Both of these have an overlap with the use of
rhythm to present information.

1.3.3 Neurofeedback and Audiovisual Entrainment
Entrainment is the matching of brain activity frequencies to external rhythms. This can

4

occur through sensory means using audio, visual or tactile input, or applied means such
as tACS (transcranial alternating current stimulation).
Whilst prior work has found that using entrainment in combination with
additional tasks has led to changes in recognition and memorization, the use of specific
patterns, tones and frequencies and their effects on brain activity and sensorimotor
learning however have had comparatively little study. A list of related work via PubMed
is summarized below in Table 1.1.

Table 1.1 Background on Entrainment via PubMed
Category
EEG and fNIRS
Rhythm – Audio – Mu and Theta
Neurofeedback and Brainwave entrainment
Ghilardi metrics
9-Hole Peg Test
Fitt’s Law
Entrainment and Stimulation
CLT Comparisons
FOT and FTT

# Papers Reviewed Prior to Testing
35
46
30
9
22
27
46
18
20

Whilst the brain has multiple frequency ranges depending on the activity, it is
necessary to evaluate prior entrainment work. A list of prior studies and their stimulation

5

frequencies is summarized below in Table 1.2.

Table 1.2 Prior Entrainment Frequencies and Modality
Researchers
Fox and Raichle
(1984)

Modality
Visual

Frequency Range
0-7.8Hz

Gomex-Ramirez
et al. (2011)

Visual

0.67Hz

Lane (1998)

Audio

1.5,4,16,24Hz

Mentis et al.
(1997)

Visual

0,1,4,7,14Hz

Padmanabhan
(2005)
Thomas & Siever
(1989)

Audio

0-4Hz

Visual

10Hz

Wach (2012)

tACS

10,20Hz

Williams (2006)

Visual

9.5-11Hz

Study Results
Positive correlation with cerebral
blood flow (CBF) in the striate
cortex from 0 to 7.8Hz
Entrainment occurred at 1.33Hz,
reflected in FFT-spectrum, alpha
amplitude increased in auditory
cortex when vision attended
Beta frequency gave more correct
target detection than theta/delta
beats
Frequencies of 0,1,4,7, and 14Hz,
results showed increase in striate
cortex activity at 7Hz, with a
decline at 14Hz
Acute anxiety was ~50% less after
30min
Produced masseter relaxation in
subjects with chronic
temporomandibular joint disorder
10Hz tACS increased movement
variability over 30min poststimulation, 20Hz tACS caused
movement slowing directly after
stimulation
Optimal visual frequencies to
improve word recognition from
9.5-11Hz, with peak power at
10.2Hz

The brain itself has the ability to change its active wave frequencies to match
external audio, visual or tactile rhythms and is defined as entrainment (Siever, 2003).
And it has been found that audiovisual entrainment in humans has a correspondence with
the stimulation frequency. One example of this is the presence of entrainment at 2x the
stimulation rate (Gomez-Ramirez et al., 2011), with entrainment occurring at 1.33Hz as

6

measured via Electroencephalography (EEG), when stimulation was presented in the subdelta band at 0.67Hz. Another study (Fox, 1984) varied light flash frequencies, and
found a positive correlation with cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the striate cortex from 0 to
7.8Hz, with a decrease in CBF above this frequency and a 20-30% increase in CBF at a
7.8Hz frequency of stimulation.
In addition to audio and visual stimulation, transcranial alternating current
stimulation (tACS) has been utilized in recent work, on the M1 region of the brains of 15
right-handed subjects (Wach, 2012). It was discovered that 10Hz stimulation increased
movement variability over 30 minutes post-stimulation, and 20Hz stimulation caused
movement slowing directly after stimulation. The conclusion drawn from this was that a
10Hz neural oscillation interferes with inhibitory circuits, therefore increasing movement
variability, an undesired result which would decrease subjects’ precision.
Most significantly, regional cerebral blood flow has been measured using positron
emission tomography (PET) during a pattern-flash visual stimulation at frequencies of
0,1,4,7, and 14Hz, (Mentis, 1997). The results showed increase in striate cortex activity
at 7Hz, with a decline at 14Hz. Likewise, a study centered on a word recognition
memory task with elderly participants (Williams, 2006), discovered optimal visual
frequencies from 9.5-11Hz for increased word recognition, with optimal recognition
close to 10.2Hz. Whilst these results point to the effects of optimal frequencies using
visual entrainment, there has been no verification for the use of audio only at these same
frequencies.
The frequency of 7.8Hz may have physiological significance aside from CBF, as
it lies adjacent to both the Theta (4-7Hz) and Alpha (8-12Hz) bands within

7

Electroencephalography (EEG), which correspond to response inhibition with possible
links to learning and memory and wakeful relaxation respectively. In addition, a subset
of the Alpha band called the Mu wave (8-12Hz) is located over the sensorimotor cortex,
which is reduced during actual or intended body movements (Ogoshi, 2013).

1.3.4 Optimal Frequencies for Movement
The presence of optimal or default frequencies for body movements as well as brain
activity has also been investigated historically. This has led to discoveries such as a
resonance for human walking at approximately 120 beats per minute, or 2Hz, though the
discoverers concluded that the biomechanics of the arm and hand may give different
frequencies (Van Noorden, 1999). Other work has found an optimal tapping frequency
for single finger tapping of ~600ms or 1.667Hz; as this has not been examined for
sequences, there may be additional correlations with multiples of this frequency (Keele,
1987). However, there is a difficulty here due to this being a repeating decimal, and it is
unknown if there will be effects on tone creation due to rounding errors.
As the possible frequencies for optimal repetitive upper extremity and finger
motion may not necessarily be identical to those for walking, they may span a range of
values, or be a multiple of existing optimal frequencies. The discovery and use of
optimal frequencies for repetitive movements has implications for such fields as sports
medicine, workplace ergonomics and rehabilitation. Movements conducted at an optimal
frequency would lead to greater efficiency of movement, fewer repetitive strain injuries,
and reduced fatigue.

8

It is important to note that the frequencies that proved most effective in assisting
recognition and memorization may not be optimal for upper extremity sensorimotor
activity. Nevertheless, it is important to prioritize subject safety, and focus on finding as
direct a correlation as possible between audio tones and upper extremity sensorimotor
activity.

1.3.5 Workplace Safety and Ergonomics
In addition to potential effects on human performance, there is also the issue of safety and
comfort, whether the workplace is an office, a mine or a factory floor.
Workplace noise has been found to be an explanatory factor in fatal industrial
accidents between 1990 and 2005 (Deshaies, 2015), especially if worker communication
was involved. In a less obvious example, worker performance and comfort can suffer
with the presence of disruptive or unwanted noise; a survey conducted within eight
European nations with 7441 participants revealed ‘noise’ as the variable with the highest
association with occupants’ comfort (Sakellaris, 2016). Finally, noise has been found to
affect recognition memory, which can lead to diminished performance or accidents by
diminishing vigilance (Molesworth, 2015).

1.3.6 Significance
Whether there exists a correlation-positive or negative-between audio tones and upper
extremity activity, the result is significant in either case.

We are surrounded by a

multitude of sounds-both repetitive and random, and if there are any effects on our

9

behavior or physiology, then it is necessary to determine what these are. It is also
possible that there are related effects with other subject factors, such as handedness,
gender or formal musical training.
In the event of a positive correlation, then the presence of isochronic tones may
enhance concentration, improve sensorimotor activity or learning, or reduce fatigue,
whilst a negative correlation may do the reverse.
If there is no correlation, then the results are significant nonetheless, as it permits
the presence of a range of ambient sound frequencies in our working environment. Many
of these may be unavoidable or costly to reduce, and so their presence would not detract
from the quality of work or living by those in the proximity.

10

CHAPTER 2
9-HOLE PEG TEST

2.1 Chapter Introduction
As the ultimate objective of this work is to determine the effects of isochronic tones on
sensorimotor activity, it is necessary to begin with an accepted, standardized test with
which to combine audio tones.

This allows minimization of variables in order to

determine possible causality.
The test administered required a short setup time to minimize subject fatigue, be
accepted by clinicians as valid, and be sufficiently challenging in order to demonstrate
subject progression. Existing tests that matched these criteria include: the Jebsen Hand
Function Test, the Perdue Pegboard Test, and the 9-Hole Peg Test.

Also, as it is

necessary to assess changes in neurotypical subjects before the possibility of requesting
post-stroke subjects, the tests must not be too familiar to daily life. If these prove to be
insufficient in some way, then a more localized test may be needed.

2.2 Established Upper Extremity Tests
The Jebsen Hand Function Test con consists of seven subtests to assess unimanual hand
functions for activities of daily living (ADLs), such as stacking checkers, card turning
and picking and placing small common objects such as paper clips. Each subtest has a
maximum of 120 seconds allotted, with a total testing time of at least 14 minutes and a
lower time score corresponding to a greater function. Whilst this test does cover multiple
unilateral hand functions, it only measures subject speed, not the quality of their

11

performance, therefore limiting its value. Also, as all the activities are performed by
neurotypical subjects, it is unlikely to present a sufficient challenge for evaluation.
The Purdue Pegboard test consists of a rectangular board with two columns of 25
holes and four concave cups at the top. Subjects are asked to place small metal pegs from
the cups on the testing side into the holes on the same side. Scores are determined by the
number of pegs placed in 30 seconds, with a total of 5 minutes for the test.
The 9-Hole Peg Test consists of a rectangular plastic board with a concave cup at
one end and nine evenly spaced holes at the other end arranged in a square. A sample
image is shown below in Figure 2.1.

Figure 2.1 The 9-hole peg test.
Source: http://www.euromedical.co.uk/section25/product328/9-hole-peg-test.html (accessed 12/12/2016).

The board is placed at the subject’s midline with the container holding the pegs on
the same side as the hand being tested. Scoring is measured either by the time taken to

12

place all the pegs in their slots and remove them, or the total number of pegs placed in 50
or 100 seconds; the time taken is given from when the subject touches the first peg to
when the last peg hits the container.
As all of these tests utilize completion time as their metric, they are limited in
their ability to assess changes; however, the 9-Hole Peg Test has the advantage of
compact size and shorter completion time over the other tests, thereby allowing a greater
number of subjects to be tested in the same amount of time.

2.3 Modified 9-Hole Peg Test
Whilst the 9-Hole Peg Test appeared to be the most promising candidate to assess the
effects of isochronic audio tones, the standard test required additional modifications to
increase the challenge for neurotypical subjects.
The main difference in the Modified Test was the inclusion of a sequence order;
the standard 9-Hole Peg Test only measures time to place the pegs in their slots, the
Modified Test included a placement order where the subject added pegs row by row,
bottom row first with the starting side opposite to the hand being used, and then removed
them in the same order. The board was still placed at the subject’s midline, but the
concave dish was directly in front of the user in order to decrease peg placement distance
and therefore decrease fatigue. Subjects wore earphones during this procedure, which
were disinfected after each test session.
In terms of sound, there were a total of four conditions combined for the different
protocols, each for 5min blocks: silence, a 5Hz isochronic tone, a 10Hz isochronic tone,
white noise. An isochronic tone is listed by its isochronic frequency, here as either 5 or

13

10Hz, which is the rate at which the tone is turned on and off. However, each also has a
carrier frequency, which is significantly higher due to the average human hearing range
extending from 20Hz to 20kHz. The white noise was obtained from simplynoise.com,
and the tones used were commercial tones from Goodvibras.com, each with a carrier
frequency of 44.1kHz. The sound volume during testing met OSHA safety levels using
the TooLoud smartphone app. The Protocol specifics are listed below in Table 2.1. All
subjects were tested for both hands. In Protocol 3, hand order and tone order were
determined for each subject using the random number generator function in Microsoft
Excel.
Two-Way ANOVA was performed on Completion Time with the repeated
measures of Stimulation and Hand Used (Left, Right). For Protocol 1, Stimulation had
three levels (10Hz, 5Hz, 0Hz), for Protocol 2, Stimulation had two levels (White Noise,
None), and for Protocol 3, Stimulation had three levels (10Hz, 5Hz, 0Hz).
Each subject was recruited from the NJIT student population, all had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision and hearing. Before testing, each answered a questionnaire to
determine their age in years (rounded up), their gender, and handedness as well as formal
musical training (if applicable), and if they still continued to the present time. As
described above, scoring was determined by the total time to place all nine pegs and then
remove all of them once, with placement beginning in the top row on the opposite to the
hand used, and removal done in the reverse order to placement. Each subject performed
each combination (left/right hand, tone/no-tone) three successive times, and the means
were extracted. Combinations are listed below in Table 2.1.

14

Table 2.1 Modified 9-Hole Peg Test Protocols
Protocol 1

Protocol 2
Protocol 3

Hand Order
Alternating, nondominant first

Tone Conditions
Fixed Tone Order;
Non-dominant: None, 5Hz, 10Hz
Dominant: None, 10Hz, 5Hz

# Subjects
7

Alternating, nondominant first
Random Hand Order

No Tones; White Noise, White
Noise
Random Tone Order; None, 5Hz,
10Hz

6
6

2.4 Results
The significant results for each of the three Protocols are shown in Figures 2.2 to 2.6

Figure 2.2 Protocol 1: main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. hand used.

15

Figure 2.3 Protocol 1: interaction plot - completion time (s) vs. stimulus(hz)*hand used.
With Protocol 1, alternating hand order and fixed tone order, there is a significant
effect on Completion Time both for Hand Used and for the combination of Hand Used
and Stimulus (see Figure 2.2). For Hand Used [F(1,6) = 65.05, p < 0.001], When
examining the mean (STD), Subjects gave shorter completion times with the Right Hand
at 19.124 (1.794) seconds than the Left Hand at 21.368 (2.652) seconds, and with less
variation shown by the smaller STD.

In terms of the combined effects of Tone

Frequency and Hand Used [F(2,6) = 3.91, p = 0.023], Right Hand Completion Times
were shorter than those for the Left Hand across all frequencies (see Figure 2.3), with
19.467 (1.840) vs. 21.057 (2.734) seconds for 10Hz, 19.086 (1.626 vs. 20.890 (2.645)
seconds for 5Hz, and 18.819 (1.929) vs. 22.157 (2.517) seconds for 0Hz/No-Tone. In
addition, the Right Hand results had smaller STDs for each frequency, and all Right Hand

16

STDs were smaller than those from the Left Hand.

Figure 2.4 Protocol 2: main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. stimulus (hz).

17

Figure 2.5 Protocol 2: main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. hand used.

With Protocol 2, alternating hand order and fixed white noise order there is a
significant effect on Completion Time both for Stimulus and for Hand Used. For
Stimulus [F(1,5) = 39.88, p < 0.001], White Noise gave shorter completion times and a
smaller STD, 19.151 (1.762) vs. 20.575 (2.078) seconds. For Hand Used [F(1,5) =
78.60, p < 0.001]. The Right Hand gave shorter completion times and a smaller STD, at
18.689 (1.334) seconds vs. 20.563 (2.088) seconds.

18

Figure 2.6 Protocol 3: Main effects plot - completion time (s) vs. hand used.

With Protocol 3, random hand and tone order, order there is a significant effect on
Completion Time for Hand Used, [F(1,5) = 17.66, p < 0.001], where the Right Hand gave
shorter Completion Times at 18.394 (2.288) seconds vs. 19.848 (2.297) seconds, and had
a smaller STD.
Collectively, there exist consistent outcomes across the three Protocols, most
apparent is that Subjects achieve shorter Completion Times with the Right hand. This is
to be expected, as Subjects use the dominant hand for activities that require greater
dexterity. Because of this, it is more difficult to gauge progress in activities, whilst using
the non-dominant hand provides a greater challenge and therefore allows a clearer
progression in testing.

Within this testing there were no significant differences in

Completion Time between multiple tone frequencies in those Protocols that had more

19

than one No-Tone condition, specifically Protocols 1 and 3. However, in Protocol 2 there
were significant differences between White Noise and No-Tone, specifically that
improved Completion Time and reduced the standard deviation. This shows the potential
for the use of audio stimulation on upper extremity motor activity, even if the audio is not
directly tied to the activity itself.
To summarize, whilst there exist differences in completion times between Tone
vs. No-Tone, and between different isochronic tone frequencies, the 9-Hole Peg Test is
not the ideal test to determine the specifics of this. Furthermore, the distribution shape of
completion times vs. tone frequency remaining unclear, whether the relationship is linear,
parabolic, plateauing, or another shape, or possibly random.

2.5 Discussion
Whilst the 9-Hole Peg Test is an established test for clinical use, it has disadvantages that
are not immediately obvious; specifically that extended use causes the pegs to become
slippery from contact with subjects’ hands, and the emphasis on speed causes subjects to
slip, and unintentionally drop them. This not only causes delays and requires subjects to
repeat testing blocks, and therefore reduces the possible effects of entrainment if the
testing block needs to be repeated.
Another disadvantage is the metrics available from the test. An optimal test is
able to supply several metrics for analysis, which is especially necessary when examining
potential effects of isochronic tones, as changes may be present in one metric, but not in
others. Whilst the 9-Hole Peg Test allows the measurement of testing times, it does not
directly supply accuracy or time for placement alone if performing peg placement and

20

removal with a single timer.
In terms of tones used, the optimal tones for upper extremity sensorimotor activity
may not be the same as those found to be useful in prior literature. Nevertheless, future
testing should include at least two tone variations in addition to a silence/no-tone
condition, in order to determine if isochronic frequency has any significant effect on
subject metrics.
Whilst it is possible to use additional equipment to record subject hand and finger
position and joint angles, such as the CyberGlove®, this increases setup time and reduces
subject dexterity.

Also, the majority of upper extremity motions in daily life are

performed without gloves, and therefore additional layering on a subject’s hands may
negate or obscure potential changes, especially if the starting pool consists entirely of
neurotypical subjects. For similar reasons, the use of motion tracking equipment such as
the OptiTrack would cause interference with subjects’ finger motions due to the need for
marker placement, and their unfamiliarity with the system. Future use is not completely
discounted, but for the above reasons, successive testing will need minimization of
variables.
A final mention is needed for subject handedness; all of the subjects in these
Protocols were right-handed. Whilst all subjects had both hands tested, and the totality of
the protocols-specifically Protocol 3-included cases where either the dominant or the
non-dominant hand was tested first, there may be asymmetrical effects depending on
subject handedness. Future testing may include a number of left-handed subjects, and
any effects this may have on protocol metrics remains unclear at this time.
With these results in mind, it is necessary to use a testing method that

21

compensates for the difficulties experienced thus far, allowing a greater number of
metrics with shortened setup time and ease of use.

22

CHAPTER 3
SEQUENTIAL FINGER TAPPING WITH FOUR TONES

3.1 Chapter Introduction
In order to determine possible correlation or causality between upper extremity activities
and audio tones, it is necessary to use a testing protocol with high repeatability and
clearly defined metrics. Therefore, the protocol utilized for the next stage was sequential
finger tapping, combined with customized audio tones.
Whilst single-, and sequential-finger tapping is an accepted testing method in the
biomedical community, the abundance of literature means that innovating using this
method is subsequently more difficult. Nevertheless, it is possible to use finger tapping
to bridge accepted testing with the experimental work performed in this dissertation.

3.2 Tone Customization
Although isochronic tones are available from commercial sources, being able to
customize characteristics of each tone such as duration, waveform shape and internal
frequencies entails creating specific audio files for testing purposes. The availability of
software and online tutorials for this purpose allows for ease of use.
The tones used in this experiment were made specifically for this dissertation
using Audacity® software, this allowed the creation of tones where not only the
isochronic frequency, but the carrier frequency, duration, and overall shape can be
customized; online tutorials also exist for the creation of specific waveforms. The carrier
frequency was chosen to be 256Hz, which represents the note of middle C in Scientific

23

pitch. This differs from middle C at 261.62Hz as used by concert orchestras, as 256Hz is
a whole number in the binary system, and allows all the octaves of C (an octave is 50%
or 200% of a note’s frequency) to remain whole numbers in both binary and decimals
down to 1Hz. Middle C was also chosen because it exists within the average human
hearing range, and can also be sung. Unlike the commercially available tone used
previously, the resulting custom tone did not have tapering in volume at the beginning or
end of the block. However, even though it is possible to include tapering in custom
tones, it introduces additional variables to adjust, such as the time from silent to full
volume, and the shape of the volume increase. As this is experimental, it is prudent to
minimize testing variables until a clearer model can be established.
As an aside, Scientific pitch was first proposed in 1713 by French physicist
Joseph Sauveur, and was promoted by the Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi; during its
advocacy by the Schiller Institute, opera singer Stefan Zucker claimed that the Institute
offered a bill in Italy for confiscation of all other tuning forks for state-sponsored
musicians.
With the carrier frequency chosen as a constant, the next step was to determine a
selection of isochronic frequencies to vary. As stated in Chapter 1, prior art gives a
number of choices for frequencies to use, and for this round of testing, having frequencies
with even spacing between them will allow the recording of changes in a more even
distribution. Therefore, the frequencies tested here were 4, 8 and 12Hz; 10Hz was also
included, as it has been used as a visual frequency in prior art, and falls within the
specified frequency range. In order to ensure subject safety, it is necessary to exclude
potential subjects who have a history of seizures, but also to minimize this risk within the

24

testing procedure itself; this is one of the primary reasons why the tones are presented in
audio as opposed to visual. The key frequency to avoid is 15Hz, which is given in prior
art as the frequency with the greatest risk of seizures, with the risk decreasing linearly on
either side. Further seizure risks not covered in this dissertation include the color red,
stripes, and alternating light and dark patterns (Fisher, 2005). Although this has been
primarily reported in visual stimulation only so far, it is important not to undergo
unnecessary risks in experimental work. Specifically, reflex epilepsy can be trigger by
environmental stimuli, not only visual, or photosensitive epilepsy, but also audio from
music or human voices.

3.3 Finger Tapping for Evaluation
Finger tapping has several advantages that allow for repeatability, which include but are
not limited to:

limited fatigue due to reduced body movement, a high degree of

conscious control, and customization in movement patterns.
Finger tapping is a method to investigate upper extremity motor planning and
execution, and has the advantage of having metrics in both behavioral changes and
neuroimaging. This has been utilized to investigate procedural learning, such as work by
Squire (1986), who investigated connections in human memory functions, and accepted
motor tests such as the Halstead-Reitan Neuropsychological Battery are used to assess the
observable physical effects of neurological damage.

3.4 Equipment and Metrics
In order to test a fixed unimanual sequence with force input, it is necessary to utilize a

25

pressure sensor to convert finger taps into a measurable, recordable signal for later
software analysis.
The testing apparatus for the subjects was a Phidget Thin Force Sensor, which is
listed as being able to measure forces from 1-100N or up to 2kg. This was connected to a
Phidget Interface Kit, which sent the measured forces to a PC via a USB port. The
default sampling rate for each sensor is 100Hz, and can go up to 500Hz. This is more
than sufficient to satisfy the Nyquist Theorem, which states that a signal composed of
sinusoidal waves must be sampled at least twice the rate of the highest frequency to
accurately record it. The interface for the sensor functions via MATLAB, and input force
data can be saved and processed for other software formats. The sensor itself was
attached to a table in front of the seated subjects via double-sided Scotch® Heavy Duty
Mounting Tape, to prevent the pad from slipping during repeated tapping. The sensor is
shown below in Figure 3.1.

Figure 3.1 Phidget thin force sensor interface with usb port.
Source: http://www.robotshop.com/media/files/images/phidgets-thin-force-sensor-large.jpg (accessed
12/12/2016).

26

Commercial headphones were used to transmit white noise and Isochronic tones
to the subjects whilst minimizing background noise. These were inserted and removed
by the subjects themselves to minimize discomfort. The headphone wires were looped
around the subjects’ head and around the non-dominant hand to avoid interference with
finger tapping motion.
The loudness of the audio administered through the headphones conformed to
OSHA standards to remain below 85dB, using the TooLoud iPhone app. For reference,
90dB is the approximate level of a hair dryer or lawnmower, over 8 hours of which per
day is considered harmful. As the tests themselves will take an estimate of 1-2 hours per
subject with a week between sessions, this minimizes risks to hearing.

3.5 Procedure
Volunteers for this stage of testing came from the student population of NJIT. The
subjects were seated in a non-swiveling chair in an upright position, and performed the
Edinburgh handedness inventory.

Once they were seated comfortably, they were

presented with 5 minutes of white noise at an OSHA-safe audio level to achieve a relaxed
state. After this, they performed a Crossover Study, in which they had to tap to maintain
a steady rhythm as fast as they can using the index finger on their dominant hand. First
they tapped for 6 minutes without a tone, then for 6 minutes to one of four randomized
custom Isochronic tones presented equally to both ears, then for 6 minutes without the
tone.
This study had 3 trials per frequency-before, during and after a tone adding up to
12 trials for single finger tapping using the index finger of the dominant hand. The order

27

of the testing frequencies was randomized in both sessions for each subject to minimize
the effects of motor learning, fatigue and data contamination, and breaks of 5-10 minutes
were provided if the subject felt fatigued.
Two-Way ANOVA was performed on Mean Tapping Frequency with the
repeated measure of Stimulation (Tone, No Tone).

3.6 Results
A total of four subjects were recruited from the NJIT student population and tested for
this procedure.
The Two-way ANOVA performed here did not reveal any significant effects of
either Tone vs No Tone [F(1,3 = 2.22, p = 0.145)]. A Main Effects plot for Stimulation is
shown below in Figure 3.2, and whilst this does show an overall decrease in Mean
Tapping Frequency during Tone conditions, it is not large enough to be significant.

28

Figure 3.2 Main effects plot for mean tapping frequency (hz) vs. stimulation, n and t
denote the no-tone and tone testing blocks, respectively.
Whilst useful in terms of testing using custom isochronic tones, the remainder of
this procedure has too much variability to be used for further testing.
Firstly, the mean human tapping frequency is given to be approximately 1.667 Hz
(Keele, 1987), and therefore the majority of given means is above this. As the force
sensor used here has a range of values instead of a clear binary state, this is not the most
appropriate choice to measure finger tapping accurately.
It was also discovered post-testing that subjects 3 and 4 may have had caffeine
prior to their testing session. Whilst it is unlikely that this affected the mean frequency
ranges in this procedure given the 5x greater than 1.667Hz frequency means, it will be
necessary to confirm with recruited subjects ahead of time to abstain from caffeine for at
least two hours as a prior study from the University of Barcelona has found that the

29

effects have that duration (Adan, 2008).
Although these limited results can be partially justified due to a dataset from only
four subjects, if further testing with a greater number of subjects will be undertaken, it is
important to determine the likelihood of significant results to avoid misspent time and
effort.

3.7 Discussion
Although self-paced unimanual finger tapping is useful overall, having examined
preliminary testing, a number of changes need to be implemented in order to improve
accuracy in results.
Although a Force Sensor allows for a greater number of metrics than completion
speed alone-and in this particular case, the measurement of rhythm/frequency-the
measured instances to press each sensor gave too much uncertainty. Therefore, using
keystrokes to measure sequences is far less ambiguous, as the resulting action is binaryeither yes or no. This does not discount the possibility of using force sensors for future
studies, but when working to test new hypotheses it is necessary to reduce ambiguity in
testing metrics with appropriate choice of hardware and metrics, as it is difficult to
extract a relationship between tone frequency and finger tapping performance.
Furthermore, subjects using the dominant hand may not be providing a significant
challenge, as each has had a lifetime to practice and improve skills on this hand.
Therefore, the next step is for subjects to perform a unimanual sequence using their nondominant hand to provide a significant challenge for a previously unknown sequence.

30

CHAPTER 4
SEQUENTIAL FINGER TAPPING WITH 2 TONES AND A FIXED SEQUENCE

4.1 Chapter Introduction
With the difficulties encountered thus far in testing, it is necessary to reduce testing
session time and the accompanying subject fatigue, as well as focus on more clearly
defined metrics.
As mentioned in the discussion of Chapter 2, using four tones per session likely
causes fatigue effects that overshadow smaller, more subtle changes in subject behavior.
Therefore, it is necessary to change to two tones per session, thereby reducing fatigue
effects. This will also reduce testing time by approximately 50%, allowing a greater
number of subjects to be tested. In addition, comparing metrics obtained from the first
and last testing blocks will allow evaluation of potential fatigue effects.
The decision was made to use 10Hz as one of the two frequencies due to being
close to a multiple of 6x the listed maximum for human finger tapping, or 10.002Hz. Out
of the four prior frequencies, this has the least deviation from a multiple of 1.667Hz.
Using 4Hz as the other frequency was done due to its use in prior art as an audio
stimulation frequency, and to give the largest possible frequency difference out of the
prior four testing frequencies.
Also worth noting is the position of 10Hz in the Mu band for EEG frequencies,
which as stated previously in Chapter 1 is reduced during actual or intended body
movements, and lies within the frequency range for optimal visual entrainment.
Although audio and visual signals do pass into the thalamus via different pathways,

31

because entrainment can occur in either case, it is necessary to have a point of
comparison before moving further.

In order to maximize the difference between

frequencies, it is necessary to choose the 2nd frequency as being as far as possible from
10Hz, the choice here being 4Hz. Furthermore, 4Hz is near to the maximum human
finger tapping frequency of approximately 600ms or 1.667Hz (Keele, 1987), and may
therefore have a more pronounced effect.
For this modified procedure, testing metrics were wholly keyboard-based in order
to minimize ambiguity in measurement, as a keystroke is a digital event-either yes or noand can be more easily recorded and analyzed.

4.2 Procedure
A total of 30 subjects were tested for this specific procedure, and each was compensated
$20 for their time. All subjects were college students with no history of neurological
disorders and were right-hand dominant. Out of the 14 subjects who answered ‘Yes’ to
Formal Musical Training, two replied that their training was vocal only. The remaining
12 had either a mixture of instruments and vocal training or instruments only. All the
instruments listed required the use of the fingers of both hands.
Each subject performed a sequence of 3 blocks of continuous typing of the ‘[a f s
d a d f]’ sequence with their non-dominant, left hand. During the second block, auditory
stimulation of either 4 Hz or 10 Hz was provided. Then the sequence of three blocks was
repeated, and the auditory stimulation was once again provided during the second block,
with a frequency of either 10 Hz or 4 Hz. The presentation order for the two stimulation
frequencies were randomized across subjects. Each 370 s testing block had two recorded

32

files - the keystroke sequence and corresponding time codes - from which MATLAB
extracted several metrics: the % Accuracy, defined as the total number of correctly
performed sequences divided by the total number of performed sequences, then
multiplied by 100; the Mean Sequence Time, defined as the time in seconds to perform a
correct sequence; the Total # of Error States, a unitless value where each Error State is
defined from the beginning point of an incorrect sequence to the beginning of the next
correct sequence.
In order to gain familiarity with the testing sequence, subjects performed a single
testing block prior to recording any of the metrics. Subjects were allowed to see the
typing sequence to perform before and after this practice block, but at no point after this.
They were also instructed to prioritize accuracy before speed.
The key sequence utilized involved all four fingers of the subjects’ non-dominant
hand, instead of the index finger of the dominant hand, and involved a fixed, repeated
sequence instead of a single-finger self-paced rhythm.
In order to reduce visual distractions, subjects also used their non-dominant hand
both to increase challenge, and provide a more easily observed change in performance
before and after testing.
Prior art for unimanual sequential finger tapping focuses on five-digit sequences
using the four fingers of the left hand: the left index finger corresponds to ‘1’, the left
middle finger to ‘2’, the left ring finger to ‘3’ and the left pinky to ‘4’. This gives the
most common sequence found as ‘[4-1-3-2-4]’. This sequence has the advantage of
providing challenge by avoiding more than two adjoining keys in a sequence, and
difficulty can be increased further to a 7-digit sequence. In order to avoid two adjoining

33

keys once again both in sequence and for successive sequences, the modified sequence is
[4-1-3-2-4-2-1]. To use this on a standard keyboard, and as the majority of subjects are
right-handed, the keys used for the non-dominant/left hand were the ‘a s d f’ location,
which is taught as the starting position for the left hand when typing. The resulting
sequence, when translated to these keys is ‘[a f s d a d f]’, and the two tones (4 Hz and 10
Hz) were randomized across the subjects using Microsoft Excel’s RAND function.
The tones used in this experiment were made using Audacity® software, this
allowed the creation of tones where not only the isochronic frequency, but the carrier
frequency, duration, and overall shape can be customized for this study. The carrier
frequency was chosen to be 256Hz, which represents the note of middle C in Scientific
pitch. This differs from middle C at 261.62Hz as used by concert orchestras, as 256Hz is
a whole number in the binary system, and allows all the octaves of C (an octave is 50%
or 200% of a note’s frequency) to remain whole numbers in both binary and decimals
down to 1Hz. Middle C was also chosen because it exists within the average human
hearing range, and can also be sung. Unlike the commercially available tone used
previously, the resulting custom tone did not have tapering in volume at the beginning or
end of the block. Whilst it is possible to include tapering in custom tones, it introduces
additional variables to adjust, such as the time from silent to full volume, and the shape of
the volume increase. As this is experimental, it is prudent to minimize testing variables
until a clearer model can be established.
With the carrier frequency chosen as a constant, the next step was to determine a
selection of isochronic frequencies to vary. As shown earlier, prior art gives a number of
choices for frequencies to use, and for this round of testing, having frequencies with even

34

spacing between them will allow the recording of changes in a more even distribution.
Therefore, the frequencies tested here were 4, 8 and 12Hz; 10Hz was also included, as it
has been used as a visual frequency in prior art, and falls within the specified frequency
range. In addition, this is close to a multiple of six times the listed maximum for human
finger tapping, or 10.002Hz.
In order to ensure subject safety, it is necessary to exclude potential subjects who
have a history of seizures, but also to minimize this risk within the testing procedure
itself; this is one of the primary reasons why the tones are presented in audio as opposed
to visual. The key frequency to avoid is 15Hz, which is given in prior art as the
frequency with the greatest risk of seizures, with the risk decreasing linearly on either
side. Further seizure risks not covered in this study include the color red, stripes, and
alternating light and dark patterns (Fisher, 2005). Whilst this has been primarily reported
in visual stimulation only so far, it is important not to undergo unnecessary risks in
experimental work. Specifically, reflex epilepsy can be trigger by environmental stimuli,
not only visual, or photosensitive epilepsy, but also audio from music or human voices.
Separate four-way ANOVA was performed on each of the three outcome
measures (% Accuracy, Mean Sequence Times, Total # of Error States) with two between
factors Gender (Male, Female) and Formal Musical Education (Training, No Training),
and two repeated measures factors Repetition (First, Second) and Block (Pre,
Stimulation, Post).
Subsequently, to investigate the effects of different frequencies of stimulation,
data from the conditions where auditory stimulation was present were analyzed. Separate
three way repeated measures ANOVAs were performed on each of the three Responses

35

(% Accuracy, Mean Sequence Times, Total # of Error States), with two between factors
of Gender (Male, Female) and Formal Musical Education (Training, No Training) and the
repeated measure factor of Tone Frequency (4Hz, 10Hz).
All variance analyses performed on the data used p<0.05 as the probability level
to accept statistical significance. Post hoc comparisons used Bonferroni correction for
multiple comparisons. For % Accuracy and Mean Sequence Times, n=30, for Total # of
Error States, n=27, as three subjects had to be excluded due to technical reasons.

4.3 Results
Three separate ANOVAs with two repeated measures (Time (Pre, Stimulation, Post) and
Repetition (1, 2)) were used to investigate the effects of auditory stimulation and motor
learning on three outcome measures: Mean Sequence Time, Accuracy and Number of
Error States.
Both main effects of Time and Repetition on Mean Sequence Time were
significant (F(2,52)=37.94, p<.0001 and F(1,26)=54.83, p<.0001, respectively). Speed of
typing increased during the second half of the experiment, with the mean (SD) Sequence
Time reduced from 2.51 (.08) sec during the first three blocks (Repetition 1) to 2.19 (.66)
sec during the last three blocks of trials (Repetition 2).
For the factor Time, post hoc comparisons showed that Mean Sequence Time
averaged across the two repetitions was significantly shorter in the two Stimulation
blocks of trials with auditory stimulation (mean (SD) of 2.27 (.72) sec) than during the
preceding Pre blocks of trials without the stimulation (mean (SD) of 2.53 (.74) sec).

36

However, Mean Sequence Time was not different in the Post trial blocks (2.25 (.67)
when compared to the Stimulation blocks (see Figure 4.1).

Table 4.1 Means Table for Sequence Time Effect: Repetition

Table 4.2 Means Table for Sequence Time Effect: Time

Table 4.3 Means Table for Sequence Time Effect: Repetition*Time

37

Figure 4.1 Interaction plot for mean sequence time

Figure 4.2 Bonferroni comparison plot for mean sequence time

Finally, there was a significant Repetition by Time interaction (F(2,52)=6.66,
p=.003). Post hoc comparisons show that the decrease in sequence time in the
Stimulation block (when compared to the Pre block) was more pronounced during the
first Repetition than during the second Repetition.
Post hoc analysis using the Bonferroni multiple comparison procedure
demonstrated that Mean Sequence Time was shorter in both blocks of trials where

38

auditory stimulation was present when compared to the preceding blocks with no
auditory stimulation (blocks 1 and 4, respectively. At the same time, Mean Sequence
Time was not different between these two blocks with stimulation and the two
subsequent blocks, as shown in Figure 4.1, where there is not a significant difference
between Stimulation and Post blocks.
There were no significant main or interaction effects on Accuracy except for the
Gender by Musical Education interaction effect (F(1,26)=5.43, P=.03).

Table 4.4 Means Table for Accuracy Effect: Gender * Music

The effect of Time on Number of Error States was significant (F(2,46)=5.71,
p=.006). Post hoc comparisons revealed that the number of error states was not different
between the Pre and the Stimulation blocks of trials. The same was true for the
Stimulation versus Post comparison. However, the difference between the Pre and the
Post blocks reached significance, probably because of the overall increased number of
typing sequences due to faster typing at the end of the experiment.

39

Table 4.5 Means Table for Error States Effect: Time

Figure 4.3 Bonferroni comparison plot for total error states

In a subsequent analysis of only the trials where auditory stimulation was present,
we investigated the potential differential effects of stimulation frequency (4Hz versus
10Hz) on the three main responses. The three-way ANOVA with factors Stimulation
Frequency, Gender and Formal Musical Training did not reveal any significant main or
interaction effects of frequency stimulation.

4.4 Discussion
Although the use of isochronic tones on upper extremity sensorimotor learning and
activity were not as pronounced as expected, the results were nonetheless significant.

40

Whilst Tone Frequency did not have any significant effects on the three metrics
chosen for this protocol, Tone vs. Pre-stimulation conditions displayed a positive effect
for Mean Sequence Times, giving shorter times regardless of gender or Formal Musical
Training. The lack of significant increase or decrease in this metric for both Poststimulation conditions indicates a degree of retention of the effects of applied Tones.
Also, whilst there was an overall decrease in Mean Sequence Times from the first to the
last block for each subject, the Tone block effects were more pronounced during the first
Tone block, regardless of frequency. As for an explanation for the reduction in sequence
time during Tone blocks, the cause is unlikely due to the Tone being a distraction, as
Post-Tone blocks are not significantly lower or higher than the immediately preceding
Tone blocks, and the overall decrease of Mean Sequence Time from Block 1 to Block 6
for each Subject occurs regardless. This supports the explanation that the presence of a
Tone enhances a process that is already present in each Subject. A likely explanation is
that Tones affect or enhance Subject vigilance, and keep them alert to allow them to
acclimate faster to performing a repetitive upper extremity unimanual task.
Despite the lack of significant effects on Accuracy due to Tones, the interaction
effect of Formal Musical Training and Gender did reveal within each gender, higher
Accuracy and a smaller Standard Deviation for Female Subjects without training, whilst
Male Subjects demonstrated lower Accuracy, and a larger Standard Deviation. Though
this result alone cannot universally support the assertion that Formal Musical Training
assists with repeating sequences and doing so with reduced variation, there is room in
possible future studies to examine this further.
The metric of Total Error States was not affected significantly by Tone vs. No-

41

Tone conditions. The only noteworthy finding here is that it is significantly affected by
fatigue, with Post-testing blocks on average giving more Error States than Pre-testing,
though whether the length or distribution of these Error States within each block is
significantly affected is a topic for future research. Furthermore, whilst all the tones in
this experiment utilized sine waves as components, it may be the case that square or
triangular waves have different effects on subject metrics if all other tone parameters
remain unchanged.
Finally, in examining Tone testing blocks only, the lack of significant effects on
any of the three metrics shows that the frequencies chosen for this study are not
significantly different, though this does not preclude other frequencies from being
significantly different, especially those closer to the maximum human tapping rate.
It is also useful to note that in prior work by Mentis et al. in 1997, the use of audio
tones was presented for longer durations than the 6min used in this study, such as 10min
or 30min; therefore, it may be necessary to have a longer stimulation duration to achieve
more statistically significant effects. The difficulty here is that including the before,
during and after conditions for each additional specific frequency adds time spent on a
session, and to avoid subject fatigue or acclimation to the sequence it is necessary to
avoid a total testing time longer than approximately an hour. Having a subject test on
successive days to try different sequences is a possibility, but the effects of acclimation
are greater, as is the difficulty of fitting testing sessions to conform to subjects’
schedules. There may be combinations of varying the durations of each of the a-b-c
conditions such as maintaining the b/during condition for 6min and reducing the a/before
and c/after each to under 6min, but at this stage it is unclear which combinations to aim

42

for.
Also, as mentioned previously, given the maximum human finger tapping speed
of 1.667Hz, none of the audio frequencies used thus far overlap directly with this tapping
range. It may be that for repetitive motor actions, audio frequencies that overlap with
motion range have a significantly more pronounced effect on successive motions than on
frequency ranges for brain activity.
As stated in earlier chapters, the use of neurotypical subjects may not display
significant effects in all metrics, and instead those with deficits, such as chronic poststroke subjects, may display greater changes.
Future work may also need to include an isochronic tone closer to the measured
optimal human finger tapping rate of 1.667Hz as determined by Keele et al., to determine
if entrainment effects occur at a lower frequency range for the fingers than what has been
used thus far. Alternatively, using tones with each of the isochronic frequencies chosen
from multiples of 1.667Hz may have noticeable effects.
Though not as strenuous as walking, typing requires integrating audio, visual and
tactile information.

As this was a self-paced activity, subjects’ attention was split

between perception of external stimuli and internal rhythm generation (Hao, 2015).
It has been found in prior work that closed-loop auditory feedback on walking
with Parkinson’s subjects, results in improved walking speed and stride length; and
compared to open-loop it has residual effects-suggesting that it could be integrated into
existing therapy programs (Baram, 2016). In contrast, because the activity performed in
this study gave tactile feedback in a closed-loop fashion, whilst the auditory Tone
stimulation was open-loop, it is plausible that their sequence tapping negated a portion of

43

the effects due to the Tones.
Using custom isochronic tones allows precision over the testing materials in not
only frequency but in duration and waveform shape. Combining this with keyboardderived unimanual sequential finger tapping metrics allows the measurement of
significant changes across subjects.

44

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION
Although the use of isochronic tones on upper extremity sensorimotor learning and
activity were not as pronounced as expected, the results were nonetheless significant.
The 9-Hole Peg Test was useful as preliminary testing, and demonstrated that
audio stimulation can have an effect on the completion time of an upper extremity
unimanual task, and that overall performance is more pronounced in subjects’ nondominant hand. Although the specific effects of each frequency were not significant
across protocols, this was addressed in subsequent testing using additional metrics and
the use of finger tapping instead.
Using custom isochronic tones allows greater precision over the testing materials
in not only frequency but in duration and waveform shape. Combining this with multiple
force sensors allowed measurement of additional metrics to sequence completion times,
such as tapping frequency, but also introduced uncertainty in recording precise waveform
shape, and revealed no significant changes.

Therefore, a more clearly-defined test

needed to be implemented for finger motion.
The further procedure change from using four tones to two allowed for shorter
testing session time and reduced subject fatigue, and whilst there were no statistically
significant effects of Tone frequency on % Accuracy, Mean Sequence Time or Total
Error States, Tone conditions did result in shorter Mean Sequence Times compared to
Pre-Stimulation conditions.
In summary, it is highly unlikely that there is entrainment occurring during audio
tones with isochronic frequencies above the maximum human finger tapping speed, as

45

the pace is simply too fast for the human hand to match and stay in time to. However, if
testing is performed in 6-minute blocks accompanied by isochronic frequencies above the
maximum human finger tapping speed, a self-paced unimanual task will not be affected
by tone frequency, but the use of audio tones will result in improved Mean Sequence
Time.
Potential future studies can include using one or more isochronic tones below that
of maximum human finger tapping rates, or combining these with more complicated
upper extremity sensorimotor tasks. In addition, whilst retention was not tested directly
during this study, it remains a potential attribute to test for future work. Ultimately, if
there exist larger effects under more specific circumstances, then it is necessary to clarify
and study these for potential benefits to workplace activity; and the results found here can
provide a foundation for future work.

46

APPENDIX A
SEQUENTIAL FINGER TAPPING WITH 4 TONES
AND A FIXED SEQUENCE UNDER EEG
Electroencephalography (EEG) allows the recording of brain activity by monitoring
voltage changes in clusters of neurons using scalp electrodes.

Its high temporal

resolution and non-invasive monitoring allow for real-time monitoring of brain activity.
EEG activity is distinguished by multiple frequency ranges, each corresponding to
different states of mind and internal activity, with lower frequencies correspond to
reduced states of consciousness. The frequency ranges most relevant to this work are
generally defined as follows: Delta (<4Hz), Theta (4-7Hz), Alpha (8-15Hz) and Mu (812Hz). In order to evaluate the possible use of EEG to gauge changes in brain activity
during repetitive upper extremity activity, the wireless Emotiv EPOCTM headset by
Emotiv Systems, Inc was tested in the Summer of 2014 during sequential unimanual
finger tapping.

Figure A.1 The emotiv epoctm eeg headset.
Source: https://emotiv.com/epoc.php (accessed 12/12/2016).

47

Subjects, each performed a fixed sequence ‘[a f s d a d f]’, using their nondominant hand for each of four tone frequencies, 4,8,10 and 12Hz, the order randomized
for each subject using Microsoft Excel’s RAND function. Each tone had a beforeduring-after block, with each block 6 minutes long, giving a total of 72 minutes per
subject. EEG signal processing and analysis were performed using EEGLAB, an open
source MATLAB toolbox, and subjects were monitored for changes in brain activity by
using the Emotiv EPOCTM headset, sampling at 128Hz. Saline solution was applied to
the scalp electrodes to improve conduction, but no adhesive tape or invasive attachment
was needed. Subjects were asked to abstain from caffeine for at least 2 hours prior to
testing, as prior art from the University of Barcelona has found that the effects have that
duration.
The metrics from this experiment came from two sources: the EEG headset and
the keyboard, which gave the total number of Error States. The initial metric give by the
headset was Global Mean Field Power (GMFP), first introduced in 1979 to describe
global EEG activity without requiring a specific reference electrode (Lehmann, 1979).
An equation for calculating it is show below in Figure A.2, (Esser, 2006).

Figure A.2 The gmfp equation.
Source: http://www.fieldtriptoolbox.org/tutorial/tms-eeg#global_mean_field_power (accessed 12/12/2016).

A total of five subjects were recorded during this experimental setup, and each

48

was compensated $15 for their participation.
Subjects were examined for % changes in activity in one of four frequency bands
for each of the four tones, both in no-tone/pre-stimulation to tone/stimulation, and
tone/stimulation to no-tone/post-stimulation.

These can each be represented by a

topoplot, an example of which is given below in Figure A.3 and was obtained via
EEGLAB, a toolbox for MATLAB.

Figure A.3 Example of a topoplot.

49

A topoplot is a scalp map of an EEG for a combination of a specific frequency
range such as alpha or theta, and a given condition; in this case, the condition is one of
the four chosen isochronic tones. The map shows a top-down view with the subject’s
face at the top, and the right and left sides on the body matching the right and left sides of
the map. Here, each of the electrodes has a scalar value, and the remaining color changes
are interpolated from these values. The color bar here represents % changes in power,
with green being 0% change, and each end representing in an increase of +10% for red,
and -10% for blue, respectively.
After examining the EEG GMFP across five subjects shows that whilst there are
subtle differences from No-Tone to Tone, and Tone to No-Tone, the differences are not
significant enough in the measured frequency bands. The majority of GFP values have
an absolute value change less than 1 per tone condition, which is not statistically
significant. Examination of the Total Error States for each subject also did not show any
statistical significance.
From the topoplots, the Group mean from No-Tone to Tone showed that the
greatest changes overall were in the 4Hz and 10Hz conditions, and the greatest changes
being in the Delta range over all the four tone frequencies-mostly decreases as indicated
by the overall shifts to blue, and in the Theta range during 4Hz. The group mean from
Tone to No-Tone showed that the largest changes are in the Delta range over all the four
tone frequencies, as decreases during 4Hz and 10Hz, and as increases during 8 and 12Hz.
There were also significant increases in the 10Hz condition during 10Hz.
Nonetheless, it is difficult to determine from these results whether entrainment is
occurring in any of the subjects, as the EEG measurements here are primarily for changes

50

in global electrical activity. The EEG frequency range that shows the greatest changeDelta in this case-is associated with slow-wave sleep, and so a decrease in this would
correlate with increased attention to one’s surroundings. With a group sample size of
only five subjects, it is difficult to draw further conclusions, but a less ambiguous series
of metrics would be needed in order to determine the direction of further testing.
It could be that entrainment is fundamentally difficult when combining isochronic
audio tones with sequential finger tapping and the frequency ranges of mental activity.
Specifically, because the maximum human finger tapping frequency is approximately
1.667 Hz from prior art, and supported by prior work in this dissertation in Chapter 3, but
the corresponding frequency range in brain activity is Delta at 0.1-3Hz, which
corresponds to slow wave sleep, and the adjoining frequency range of Theta at 4-7Hz
corresponds to drowsiness. Therefore, asking subjects to concentrate on maintaining a
steady rhythm may negate any entrainment effects unless they maintain a slower rhythm.
In addition, due to testing subjects with four tones per session, the session is over
an hour long, and effects due to fatigue may be too prominent. Therefore it is necessary
to use fewer tones per session in order to determine possible effects on upper extremity
sensorimotor activity.
Utilizing EEG allowed additional monitoring of subject responses to Tone vs. NoTone conditions, but due to the exploratory nature of this dissertation, the resulting
effects are inconclusive, and are therefore best left for future work. Also, because all of
the subjects in this protocol would be considered neurotypical by their own admission,
any visible effects may not be statistically significant with only five subjects. EEG could
be utilized in future testing or studies, but for simplicity and reduced setup time, it is

51

more practical to utilize it only if there are results first confirmed in more clearly defined
metrics.

52

APPENDIX B
MATLAB SOURCE CODE FOR DATA INPUT
In the course of testing, it was necessary to record and extract data from subjects’ finger
tapping, whether single or sequential. And for this, MATLAB software was used.
The following MATLAB file, ‘prasademgmodv1b.m’, recorded the input from a
USB-connected force sensor, recorded the pressure exerted during self-paced dominant
hand unimanual finger tapping, and then extract the mean tapping frequencies and
displayed these as histograms.
% data=load('gnrrightsingleandsequ481012hzabc.mat');
x = gnrrightsingle4hza;
fs =500;
lc = 30;
N=30;
alpha =.36;
rawemg = x(:,1);
[B,A] = butter(4, lc/(fs/2));
fullEMG = filtfilt(B,A, rawemg);
time = (1:length(fullEMG))/(lc*2);
time2 = (1:length(rawemg))/fs;
h = (ones(1, N)/N);
Vt = conv(fullEMG, h, 'same');
Vt = expinv(1-alpha, Vt);
g = Vt(1:end-1) <= fullEMG(2:end);
g1 = [g' 0];
g2 = [0 g'];
onsets = find( g1 == 1 & g2==0);
times = time2(onsets);
figure (1);
plot(time2, rawemg)
hold on;
plot(time2(g), 20*ones(size(time(g))), '*r');
figure(2);

53

[n, x]=hist(1./diff(times), 100);
hist(1./diff(times), 100);
xlabel('frequencies in Hz');
ylabel('# of occurences');
m=(n*x')/sum(n);
title(['mean= ' num2str(m)])
In order to determine the testing metrics of Accuracy, Mean Sequence Time and
Total Number of Correct Sequences, it was necessary to record keyboard sequences by
multiple subjects as well as corresponding timecodes, and then compare the recorded
correct sequences to the total possible correct sequences in each block.
The following MATLAB file, ‘keytest.m’ recorded the keystroke sequence and
corresponding timecodes from a 370s testing block, 1 of 7 for each subject; once the
block ended with three successive beeps, MATLAB then saved two separate files per
block named ‘sequence’ and ‘times’, respectively. These were then renamed between
testing blocks with a prefix to denote the block order, with ‘fp’ as the practice block, and
then fa through ff for the remaining blocks.
global sequence
global times
sequence = [];
times = [];
a = figure;
set(a, 'WindowKeyPressFcn', @onKeyPress);
tic;
%pattmod b = [a f s d a d f];
pause(370);
display('Collection Stopped');
beep;pause(.25);beep;pause(.25);beep;pause(.25);
close(a);
The following MATLAB file, ‘findsequencesmodstd2.m’ extracted the Accuracy,

54

Mean Sequence Time and Total Number of Correct Sequences for a testing block, 1 of 7
for each subject, with the correct key sequence as ‘afsdadf’. If an error state is detected,
the first full correct sequence after this error state occurs is considered to be the
continuation of the correct sequences.
close all;
str='afsdadf';
fullstr=sequence;
fullstr(fullstr=='z')='a';
timeseq = times;
indices = [];
sequencesfound = length(indices);
nfullstr = fullstr;
sequencesfound = 0;
globalstart=0;
while(~isempty(strfind(nfullstr,str)))
cindices = strfind(nfullstr, str);
nfullstr = nfullstr((cindices(1)+length(str)):end);
indices(end+1) = globalstart + cindices(1);
globalstart = globalstart + cindices(1)+ length(str)-1;
sequencesfound = sequencesfound + 1;
end
idealnumsequences = floor(length(fullstr)/length(str));
accuracy = (sequencesfound/idealnumsequences)*100
sequencetimes = [];
for i=1:length(indices)
t1 = timeseq(indices(i));
t2 = timeseq(indices(i)+length(str)-1);
sequencetimes(end+1) = t2-t1;
end
meanseqtime = mean(sequencetimes)
keystroketimes = [];
for i=1:length(indices)
for j = 1:(length(str)-1)
t1 = timeseq(indices(i)+j-1);

55

t2 = timeseq(indices(i)+j);
keystroketimes(end+1) = t2-t1;
end
end
meankeystroketimes = mean(keystroketimes)
% detection of error states
init = indices(1) + length(str);
state = zeros(size(fullstr));
state(init-5:init-1) = 1;
currInd = init;
inNormalState = true;
templateIndex=1;
while(currInd <= length(fullstr))
currCharac = char(fullstr(currInd));
desiredCharac = str(templateIndex);
if(currCharac == desiredCharac)
state(currInd) = 1;
templateIndex = templateIndex +1;
if(templateIndex > length(str)), templateIndex=1; end
else
I = find(indices > currInd);
if(isempty(I)), break; end
I = indices(I(1)) + length(str);
state(I-5:I-1) = 1;
templateIndex = 1;
end
currInd = currInd +1;
end
fstate = [-1, state];
bstate = [state, -1];
I=find((fstate == 1) & (bstate ==0))-1;
I2=find((fstate == 0) & (bstate ==1))-1; %error ending time
errortimes = timeseq(I);
errorendingtimes = timeseq(I2);
if(length(errortimes)> length(errorendingtimes))
errorendingtimes(end+1) = 370;
end
if(length(errortimes)< length(errorendingtimes))
errorendingtimes(1) = [];
end
errorlengths = errorendingtimes-errortimes;

56

totalerrors = 1:length(errortimes);
normtotalerrors =totalerrors/max(totalerrors);
% plot(errortimes, totalerrors, 'sq');
%
%
%
%

[a,b,c] = createfit(errortimes, totalerrors)
title('Cumulative Error States over Time');
xlabel('Time(s)');
ylabel('Number of Error States');

figure;
[an, bn] = createfitnorm(errortimes, normtotalerrors,
timeseq, errorendingtimes);
hold on
numberoferrors = length(errortimes)
disp('done')

57

REFERENCES

9 Hole Peg Test - Handy Healthcare. (2013, May 31). Retrieved from
http://handyhealthcare.co.uk/9-hole-peg-test-5170.html
A440 (pitch standard). (n.d.). In Wikipedia. (2016, April 17). Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A440_%28pitch_standard%29
Adan, A., Prat, G., Fabbri, M., Sànchez-Turet, M. (2008). Early effects of caffeinated and
decaffeinated coffee on subjective state and gender differences, Progress in
Neuro-psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, Volume 32, Issue 7,
October 2008, p1698-703.
Albouy, G., Sterpenich V., Vandewalle, G., Darsaud, A., Gais, S., Rauchs, G., Desseilles,
M., Boly, M., Dang-Vu, T., Balteau, E., Degueldre, C., Phillips, C., Luxen, A., &
Maquet, P. (2012). Neural correlates of performance variability during motor
sequence acquisition, Neuroimaging, Volume 60, Issue 1, March 2012, p324-331.
Ali, D.. (2010, October 30). Rehab Measures - Nine-Hole Peg Test. Retrieved from
http://www.rehabmeasures.org/lists/rehabmeasures/dispform.aspx?id=925
Audacity. (2013, March 10). Retrieved from http://www.audacityteam.org/
Audio-visual entrainment. (n.d.) .). In Wikipedia. Retrieved August 16 2016, from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Audio-visual_entrainment
Baram Y, Aharon-Peretz J, Badarny S, Susel Z, Schlesinger I (2016) Closed-loop
auditory feedback for the improvement of gait in patients with Parkinson's
disease. Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 2016, April 15;363:104-6.
Caffeine | C8H10N4O2 – PubChem. (2016, March 11). Retrieved from
http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/summary/summary.cgi?cid=2519
Chen, H. M., Chen, C. C., Hsueh , I. P., Huang, S. L., & Hsieh, C. L. (2009). Test-retest
reproducibility and smallest real difference of 5 hand function tests in patients
with stroke. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 23(5): 435-440.
Cognitive Load. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. (2016, April 17). Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cognitive_load
Conway, J. (2016, April 25). TooLoud Pro on the App Store. Retrieved from
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/tooloud-pro/id425137981?mt=8
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2008). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York
City: Harper Perennial Modern Classics, 1st edition, 2008. Print (pp.1-1).

58

Create Isochronic Tones Using Sine Waves. (2009, February 11). Retrieved from
http://isochronic-tones.blogspot.com/2009/02/create-isochronic-tones-usingsine.html
Deshaies P., Martin R., Belzile D., Fortier P., Laroche C., Leroux T., Nélisse H., Girard
S. A., Arcand R., Poulin M., Picard M. (2015). Noise as an explanatory factor in
work-related fatality reports. Noise & Health, 2015 Sep-Oct; 17(78): 294–299.
Do You Believe in Brainwave Entrainment? Try Online Now!. (2016, April 17).
Retrieved from http://www.goodvibras.com/
Electroencephalography. (n.d.). (2016, April 17). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electroencephalography
Emotiv EPOC – 14 Channel Wireless EEG Headset. (2016, April 16). Retrieved from
https://emotiv.com/epoc.php
Entrainment .(n.d.). (2015, February 24). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entrainment_(biomusicology)
Esser, S. K., Huber, R., Massimini M., Peterson M. J., Ferrarelli F., & Tononi G. (2006).
A direct demonstration of cortical LTP in humans: A combined TMS/EEG study,
Brain Research Bulletin Volume 69, Issue 1, 15 March 2006, 86-94.
Fisher, R. S., Harding, G., Erba, G., Barkley, G. L., & Wilkins, A. (2005). Photic- and
Pattern-induced Seizures: A Review for the Epilepsy Foundation of America
Working Group, Epilepsia, 46(9):1426–1441, 2005, Blackwell Publishing, Inc.
Fox, P. T., and Raichle, M. E. (1984). Stimulus rate dependence of regional cerebral
blood flow in human striate cortex, demonstrated by positron emission
tomography. Journal of Neurophysiology. 51(5): 1109–1120.
Gomez-Ramirez, M., Kelly, S. P., Molholm, S., Sehatpour, P., Schwartz, T. H., & Foxe J.
J. (2011). Oscillatory Sensory Selection Mechanisms during Intersensory
Attention to Rhythmic Auditory and Visual Inputs: A Human ElectroCorticographic Investigation, Journal of Neuroscience 2011, 31(50): 18556–
18567.
Guclu-Gunduz, A., Citaker, S., Nazliel, B., & Irkec, C. (2012). Upper extremity function
and its relation with hand sensation and upper extremity strength in patients with
multiple sclerosis. NeuroRehabilitation Vol. 30, Issue 4, 2012, 369-374.
Hao Q, Ogata T, Ogawa K, Kwon J, Miyake Y (2015) The simultaneous perception of
auditory-tactile stimuli in voluntary movement. Frontiers in Psychology, 2015
Sep 24;6:1429.

59

Holloway, A.. (2014, January 20). The incredible sound effects of Malta's Hypogeum Hal
Saflieni. Retrieved from http://www.ancient-origins.net/news-historyarchaeology-mysterious-phenomena/experts-unravel-sound-effects-malta-shypogeum-hal
Holmes, G.L.. (2013, September) Reflex Epilepsies. Retrieved from
http://www.epilepsy.com/learn/types-epilepsy-syndromes/reflex-epilepsies
Human Hearing Range. (n.d.). (2016, April 17). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hearing_range#Humans
Jung, T. P., Makeig, S., Stensmo, M., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1997). Estimating Altertness
from the EEG Power Spectrum, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
Vol. 44, No. 1.
Keele, S. W., Ivry, R. I., & Pokorny, R. A. (1987). Force control and its relation to
timing, Journal of Motor Behavior, 1987 March, 19(1):96-114.
Kidmose, P., Looney, D., & Mandic, D. P., Auditory Evoked Responses from Ear-EEG
Recordings, 34th Annual International Conference of the IEEE EMBS.
Lane, J. D., Kasian, S. J., Owens, J. E., Marsh, G. R. (1998). Binaural auditory beats
affect vigilance performance and mood. Physiol Behav. 1998;63(2):249-252.
Ledberg, A. & Robbe, D. (2011). Locomotion-Related Oscillatory Body Movements at
6–12 Hz Modulate the Hippocampal Theta Rhythm, PLos One, 2011, Vol. 6,
Issue 11, 1-10.
Lehmann, D., & Skrandies, W., Reference-free identification of components of
checkerboard-evoked multichannel potential fields, Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, Volume 48, Issue 6, June 1980, 609-621.
Lisman, J. E., & Jensen, O. (2013). The theta-gamma neural code. Neuron 77, 1002–
1016. 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.007.
Manns, A., Miralles, R., & Adrian, H. (1981). The application of audiostimulation and
electromyographic biofeedback to bruxism and myofascial pain-dysfunction
syndrome. Oral Surgery, 52 (3), 247-252.
Mathiowetz, V., Weber, K., Kashman, N., & Volland, G. (1985). Adult norms for the
Nine Hole Peg Test of finger dexterity. Occupational Therapy Journal of
Research, 5, 24–38.
Mentis, M. J., Alexander, G. E., Grady, C. L., Horwitz, B., Krasuski, J., Pietrini,
P.,…Rapoport, S. I. (1997). Frequency Variation of a Pattern-Flash Visual
Stimulus during PET Differentially Activates Brain from Striate through Frontal
Cortex. Neuroimage 5, 116–128.

60

Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. (n.d.). In Wikipedia. Retrieved February 24 2015, from
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mihaly_Csikszentmihalyi
Molesworth B. R., Burgess M., Zhou A. (2015). The effects of noise on key workplace
skills. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 2015 Oct;138(4):205461.
Musical Notation. (n.d.). (2016, April 17). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Musical_notation
Mu Wave. (n.d.). (2016, October 5). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mu_wave
Ogoshi, S., Ogoshi, Y., Momose, S., Takezawa, T., & Mitsuhashi, Y. (2013). Mu rhythm
suppression during the imagination of observed action, Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC), 2013 35th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE. September 2013.
Olsson, C. J., Jonsson, B., & Nyberg, L. (2008). Learning by doing and learning by
thinking: an FMRI study of combining motor and mental training, Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, June 2008.
OSHA, Occupational Noise Exposure. (2016, April 27). Retrieved from
https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/noisehearingconservation/
Padmanabhan, R., Hildreth, A. J., & Laws, D. (2005). A prospective, randomised,
controlled study examining binaural beat audio and pre-operative anxiety in
patients undergoing general anaesthesia for day case surgery, Anaesthesia.
2005;60(9):874-877.
Patrick, G. J. (1996). Improved neuronal recognition in ADHD: An application of fifteen
sessions of photic-driven EEG neurotherapy. Journal of Neurotherapy, 1(4), 2736.
Phidgets Inc. (2016, April 16). Retrieved from http://www.phidgets.com/
Raad, J. (2012, August 17). Rehab Measures - Jebsen Hand Function Test. Retrieved
from
http://www.rehabmeasures.org/Lists/RehabMeasures/DispForm.aspx?ID=1025
Raad, J. (2014, January 9). Rehab Measures – Purdue Pegboard Test. Retrieved from
http://www.rehabmeasures.org/Lists/RehabMeasures/DispForm.aspx?ID=1144
Sakellaris, I. A., Saraga, D. E., Mandin, C., Roda, C., Fossati, S., de Kluizenaar,
Y.,…Bluyssen, P. M. (2016). Perceived Indoor Environment and Occupants'
Comfort in European "Modern" Office Buildings: The OFFICAIR Study.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 2016 Apr
25;13(5).

61

Scientific Pitch. (n.d.). (2016, April 17). In Wikipedia. Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_pitch
Siever, D. (2003). Applying audio-visual entrainment technology for attention and
Iearning-pan II I. Biofeedback, 31, 4. 24-29.
SimplyNoise The Best Free White Noise Generator on the Internet. (2016, April 17).
Retrieved from https://www.simplynoise.com/
Squire, L. R. Mechanisms of memory. Science. 1986; 232(4758):1612–1619.
Thomas, N., & Siever, D. (1989). The effect of repetitive audio/visual stimulation on
skeletomotor and vasomotor activity. In Waxman, D., Pederson, D., Wilkie, I., &
Meller, P. (Eds.) Hypnosis: 4th European Congress at Oxford, 238-245. London:
Whurr Publishers.
Tutorial:tms-eeg - FieldTrip. (2016, April 17). Retrieved from
http://www.fieldtriptoolbox.org/tutorial/tms-eeg#global_mean_field_power
Van Merrienboer J. J. G., & Sweller, J. (2010). Cognitive load theory in health
professional education: design principles and strategies. Blackwell Publishing
Ltd. 2009, MEDICAL EDUCATION 2010, 44: 85–93.
Van Noorden, L., & Moelants, D. (1999). Resonance in the perception of musical pulse,
Journal of New Music Research, 28 (1): 43-66.
Wach, C., Krause, V., Moliadze, V., Paulus, W., Schnitzler, A., & Pollok, B. (2013).
Effects of 10 Hz and 20 Hz transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS) on
motor functions and motor cortical excitability. Behavioral Brain Research 241
(2013) 1-6.
Williams, J. H., Ramaswamy, D., & Oulhaj, A. (2006). 10Hz flicker improves
recognition memory in older people, Neuroscience. 2006; 7:21.
Yotsumoto, Y., Watanabe, T., Chang, L. H., & Sasaki Y. (2013). Consolidated learning
can be susceptible to gradually-developing interference in prolonged motor
learning, Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience, May 2013.
Zimmermann, K. M., Bischoff, M., Lorey, B., Stark, R., Munzert, J., & Zentgraf, K.
(2012). Neural Correlates of Switching Attentional Focus during Finger
Movements: An fMRI Study, Frontiers in Psychology, December 2012.

62

