ISSN 1870-4069

Towards a Method for Biosignals Analysis as
Support for the Design of Adaptive
User-Interfaces
Heber Avalos-Viveros1 , Guillermo Molero-Castillo1,2 ,
Edgard Benitez-Guerrro1 , Everardo Bárcenas1,2
1

Universidad Veracruzana, Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico
heeber.av@gmail.com,edbenitez@uv.mx
2
CONACYT−Universidad Veracruzana, Mexico
{ggmoleroca,iebarcenaspa}@conacyt.mx

Abstract. Biosignals are information sources obtained from the different biological and physiological structures of the human organism. This
paper presents the advance of the proposal of a method for the biosignals analysis, which allows serving as support for the design of adaptive
user-interfaces. This method includes four stages: biosignals collection,
extraction and preparation, analysis, and getting patterns. This analysis
and obtaining of user patterns through the biosignals could be especially
useful because they represent valuable information related to events or
actions of user behavior, which could be incorporated in the stage of
requirements specification for the design of adaptive user-interfaces, and
even serve for the refinement of these.
Keywords: Biosignals, Adaptive user-interfaces, Data mining, User requirements.

1

Introduction

In recent years, the technological development has allowed obtaining data sources
through different devices, as brainwave diadems, smartwatches, smartphones and
even by other body sensors. This in order to obtain biosignals generated by the
human body [24]. These devices have processing capabilities, which make it possible the continuous collection of data flows about users and their environment,
as interactions, locations, physiological states, contact with other users and other
digital traces [27].
In this context, biosignals could be collected into different frequencies, with
or without intervention human, and for prolonged periods [28]. Nevertheless, it
requires a series of analytical considerations, beginning with careful experimentation to ensure the analysis and design of a case study, participant training,
and data storage [27].
Therefore, through these biosignals, we try to know the human behavior
related to events, that is, through the analysis of data we could discover certain events inherent in the user and their environment [8]. Through this type of
pp. 9–19; rec. 2018-03-12; acc. 2018-05-22

9

Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

Heber Avalos-Viveros, Guillermo Molero-Castillo, Edgard Benitez-Guerrro, Everardo Bárcenas

analysis, data patterns related to the user could be obtained through the application of data mining techniques, as clustering, association rules, decision trees,
Bayesian networks, among others.
For example, a case of special interest that is addressed in this research is
to find a way to capture, process and analyze biosignals of the user in order
to obtain information of interest, known as patterns, for the design of adaptive
interfaces. These user data patterns can serve as support information for the
design of adaptive user-interfaces of a particular system.
However, to have truly adaptive interfaces is necessary to acquire diverse
information about the user, as your preferences, needs, features and software interests [14]. This represents a research challenge in human-computer interaction
(HCI) for the detection and analysis of biosignals, reliably, related to human
behavior events [15].
One of the current approaches to the capture of biosignals is through lowcost devices, as a) Emotiv Epoc, for the capture of brainwave signals through a
multichannel electroencephalogram (EEG), b) smartwatches, to measure heart
rates, and c) smartphones, for measure and control cardiac pulses through optical
sensors, like the electrocardiogram. At present, these devices have a wide range
of applications in HCI and interfaces customization [15]. Therefore, as part of
this research, we have the intention to collect biosignals through this type of
devices, which could be a complex task due to the noise of the signal [3].
This paper presents an advance of the proposal of a method for the biosignals analysis as support the design of adaptive user-interfaces. This method is
divided into four phases: a) collection, b) extraction and preparation, c) analysis,
d) getting patterns. It is sought that the information obtained from the user,
through the biosignals analysis, could be useful as a support for the definition
of requirements in the design of the adaptive interfaces. Since this is usually a
complex task because it is needed translate the software needs of the users into
a functions set and restrictions.

2
2.1

Background
Biosignals

A signal is a form of data transmission, the acquisition of which allows obtaining
information about the source that generated it. In this sense, acquisition sources
of biosignals are the different biological and physiological structures of the human
body organism [13]. The representation of the biosignals facilitates the analysis
and identification of the data. The main aim of the processing and analysis
of these signals is the information acquisition, diagnosis, monitoring, therapy,
control, and evaluation [22].
The capture of these biosignals allows us to extract information about the
functioning of the different organs [13]. In the biosignals, amplitude and frequency ranges are considered as significant factors [10]. These ranges may vary
depending on the method of acquisition, whether through brainwave diadems,
Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

10

ISSN 1870-4069

Towards a Method for Biosignals Analysis as Support for the Design of Adaptive User-Interfaces

smartwatches, smartphones, among other devices, and their values are approximate, whether they are normal or out of range. Figure 1 shows a conceptual
representation of the extraction and analysis of biosignals in order to serve as
support information in the definition of requirements for the design of adaptive
user-interfaces.

Fig. 1. Conceptual representation of acquisition and analysis of biosignals.

Given the variety of biosignals, nowadays, there are at least three ways to
classify them [13]: by their existence, nature, and origin. By its existence: a)
permanent, which exist without any artificial impact, or excitement; b) induced,
which are triggered artificially, excited or induced. By its nature: a) quasi-static,
that transports information in its stationary state that can exhibit relatively
slow changes with time; b) dynamics, which produce large changes in the time
domain. By its origin: a) electrical, such as the nervous system and muscle cells;
b) magnetic, such as the heart, the brain, the lungs, among others; c) mechanical,
such as movement, displacement, tension, force, pressure and flow; d) optic,
which is generated from the optical attributes of biological systems; e) acoustic,
blood flow, muscle noises; and f) chemical, which contain information about the
levels and changes of chemical agents in the body.

2.2

Interfaces

Before 1960, the term user interfaces was practically non-existent. Later, in 1963
Ivan Sutherland published, in his PhD thesis, the creation of graphic images
directly on a screen using an optical pencil. It was the appearance of the first
graphical user interface [17]. Then, in the early 1960s, Douglas Engelbart and
William English worked on a project on a new control device, which was the
first mouse. Also, in 1968 Engelbart presented a system that was the first to
incorporate hypertext, windows, document control and teleconferences.
On the other hand, in the 80s, the evolution of HCI became a field of usercentered research [12]. This field of knowledge studies the design, evaluation, and
implementation of interactive technological devices, where technology happened
to become a support tool [2].
ISSN 1870-4069

11

Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

Heber Avalos-Viveros, Guillermo Molero-Castillo, Edgard Benitez-Guerrro, Everardo Bárcenas

Nowadays, user interfaces are the part of the system that is seen, heard and
felt. They are the means by which the user can communicate with a device or
computer. This way, HCI takes place through the user interface, which consists of
interaction through a screen, keyboard, mouse, speaker, special buttons, lights,
gloves that can feel the movements of the fingers, eye sensors, among others [11].
In this sense, adaptive interfaces are those that adapt automatically to the
characteristics of the users, allowing the improvement in the satisfaction and permanence of the user interacting with the system [21]. Current trends are towards
systems for the recovery and refinement of information [16], this depending on
the interaction patterns that allow adapting the results through adaptive interfaces. However, at present it is sought interfaces that may be understandable,
seeking greater effectiveness when performing certain tasks [21]. For this, we
seek to define new support methods for the development of adaptive interfaces
in terms of user-centered design.
2.3

Current Challenges

Nowadays, the biosignals analysis has an increase in the different fields and
applications. The interest consists in analyzing physiological measurements [23].
Among the limitations are the problems of handling large amounts of data, noise
and other factors that affect cognitive states [26].
This situation leads to various research challenges that are classified as technical and usability [1]. The technical challenges are related to the obstacles of the
system, especially in the obtaining of signals, since the data obtained are not
shown linearly, but dynamically with varied ranges and frequencies and with
noise in the signals. Usability challenges describe the problems that affect the
level of acceptance and express limitations that users face when using technology.
In the case of biosignals processing, it requires at least three states [4]: a)
measurement (biosignals acquisition), b) transformation (redundancy elimination and noise), and c) interpretation (logical base, heuristic reasoning, and statistical origin). To realize these stages requires effort, not only by the biosignals
analyst but also by the users, since the changes in mood can trigger unreliable
data records.
Another challenge is the selection of an adaptive channel for users, and thus
have appropriate interfaces according to the needs for each of these [14]. Here,
the environment has an important role when signals are captured to avoid noise
and high ranges [3]. Unfortunately, there are noise problems at the time of signal
acquisition.
On the other hand, in the context of user interfaces, the search for new
interfaces is associated with technological advances. This is because of every day
the number of users with different training, social level and abilities increases [19].
Therefore, there is a greater willingness to use new technologies. This situation
represents a challenge for the HCI, which must keep pace with these advances
and make the most of the technologies to be made available to users [2].
In this sense, the construction of user-interfaces that are easy to use, easy to
memorize, efficient in terms of use and with a low error rate represents another
Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

12

ISSN 1870-4069

Towards a Method for Biosignals Analysis as Support for the Design of Adaptive User-Interfaces

important challenge [6]. Therefore, it is important to involve the user from the
early stages of the construction process, considering aspects of interest, as the
tasks, its interests, preferences, and even its physical limitations.
2.4

Related Work

At present, there are several works that seek to provide new mechanisms and
applications that allow analyzing the behavior of users in certain contexts and
thus develop new tools and interfaces in HCI.
In [7] the authors looked for a way to design adaptive interfaces through
the biosignals analysis obtained from the human body. For this, they used functional near-infrared spectroscopy (FNIRS). This technology allowed recording
changes in blood oxygenation in the brain is a non-invasive way and to obtain
measurements in environments with lots of light and noise. By analyzing some
interfaces, it was possible to measure the workload of the users when performing
certain tasks. Two types of users were used, those who had knowledge about the
operation of the interface and those who did not have prior information. The
results determined that 90% of users with knowledge about the interface presented less workload compared to those who did not have knowledge. With this,
the authors determined that the functioning of an interface could be measured
through FNIRS.
Another approach to the design of adaptive user-interfaces was proposed by
[15],where they developed a framework that allows acquiring related information
about the interests and profiles of users. They place special emphasis on the
design of adaptive user-interfaces for people with some type of limitation, that
is, due to cerebrovascular accidents or aging, in order to improve accessibility
problems in this type of users.
In [9] the biosignals collection was sought, but in a multimodal context, that
is, acoustic signals (ACC), electromyography (EMG) and electroencephalogram
(EGG) were used. The authors designed a framework for obtaining of signals
through various devices at the same time. The objective was to create a tool for
the collection, storage, and visualization of the signals obtained from the devices,
this in order to analyze them based on possible relationships and dependencies
between them. To later be used in the development of adaptive interfaces.
In [3] they used electroencephalography (EEG) signals from a point of view
of experimental psychology and cognitive science. They focused on this type of
signals because there are currently low-cost devices compared to traditional devices used in the field of Health. For this, they used Emotiv EPOC device, which
allows obtaining information through brain waves. Two studies were done, one
to determine the feasibility of using Emotiv EPOC to measure interhemispheric
spectral differences, and another to analyze variations in cerebral activity. The
results showed that, for the first case, the data obtained were sufficiently clean,
which allowed revealing characteristics of interest through the EEG, while in the
second case the variations in the signals were demonstrated by physical stimuli
of the user.
ISSN 1870-4069

13

Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

Heber Avalos-Viveros, Guillermo Molero-Castillo, Edgard Benitez-Guerrro, Everardo Bárcenas

In [20] the possibilities of using biosignals processing in real time were explored. This to improve the interaction with the user-interfaces. The analysis
of an interface was made through an intelligent agent, who oversaw asking the
user questions in order to know their reactions through eye signals and brain
waves. The results obtained allowed to know the physical reactions generated by
the user, this allowed to reflect and adapt their behavior according to the user’s
emotions.
In [5], the evaluation of adaptive user-interfaces was sought, taking into account the emotional state and workload of the user when interacting with these.
For this, monitoring devices were used that allowed to capture physiological signals of the human body, such as eye-tracking and brain waves through Emotiv
EPOC. The study focused on measuring the time it took the user to use an interface with certain tasks, as well as measuring the number of errors that arose at
the time of their interaction. These tasks were carried out through three interaction mechanisms: a) toolbar, b) menus, and c) interactive bar, named Boulevard.
The results determined that the user had a good acceptance and little workload
when using the proposed interaction style (Boulevard). Therefore, they demonstrated that the use of physiological signals measuring devices could be of great
help to know the behavior of the user with certain user interfaces.
Finally, in [29], the authors sought to provide a graphical user-interface as
an expressive channel to represent the artistic qualities of several users with a
disability. They presented special attention in the design of the interface, whose
input data were biosignals type electromyography (EMG), electrooculography
(EOG) and electroencephalography (EEG). For this, they used a mechanism
through which the biosignals were acquired, then the data processing was done,
where to mitigate low signals and with noise, was used the mathematical method
called Lorenz System. Thus, through the results obtained from various tests with
users, with and without disabilities, they were able to determine that, through
biosignals as data entry in the interfaces, it was possible to execute actions in
the application; in this case they used predefined data to model a vase, and then
design one freely.

3

Method

In order to obtain reliable biosignals data sources, as support for the design of
adaptive interfaces, four work stages were defined, shown in Figure 2. These
stages are exploratory and applied type since it is an emerging issue that seeks
to solve the problem through a theoretical-practical exploration.
In the first stage, the beginning of the research is proposed, which is fundamental to obtain reliable data sources that support the analysis of biosignals
obtained from physical and logical sensors, with the purpose of measuring physiological signals of the users. The second stage focuses on the analysis and conceptual design of the solution proposal for obtaining and analyzing biosignals.
The third stage is the development of the analysis method associated with the
study case. The fourth stage focuses on the evaluation of the biosignals analysis
Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

14

ISSN 1870-4069

Towards a Method for Biosignals Analysis as Support for the Design of Adaptive User-Interfaces

Fig. 2. Method of work for the development of the research proposal.

method, from the point of view of performance and compliance with the initial
requirements and objectives.

4

Proposal

The analysis and design of user-interfaces is a complex process since the requirements and needs of the users must be known, to whom the interface is addressed [7, 15]. Currently, to identify these requirements and needs of the users,
conventional techniques are used [18], as documentation analysis, observations,
interviews, quizzes, mind maps, brainstorming, sketches, prototypes and other
instruments of interest.
However, the previous techniques may not be enough, due to poorly used
the development tools and methods by software developers [25]. Therefore, an
adequate understanding of the user’s requirements is of great importance, in
this way, it is fundamental to consider other aspects of the users, such as: their
interests, preferences and even affective states, as well as the development environment and the available technologies.
Based on the above, this research project seeks to design a method to extract
and analyze biosignals data obtained from users, with the purpose of using this
information as support in the design of adaptive user-interfaces. The reason for
obtaining and analyzing biosignals is that they represent valuable information
related to events or actions of user behavior. For this, as a method four stages
ISSN 1870-4069

15

Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

Heber Avalos-Viveros, Guillermo Molero-Castillo, Edgard Benitez-Guerrro, Everardo Bárcenas

of work are proposed (see Figure 3) a) biosignals collection, b) extraction and
preparation, c) analysis, and d) getting patterns.

Fig. 3. Conceptual design of the biosignals analysis method.

The collection (phase 1) involves the use of devices to capture the EEG type
biosignals and cardiac pulses, either through brainwave tunes, smartwatches and
even by body sensors. Once the acquisition devices have been defined, it must
be defined a data capture strategy, for this, it is suggested to deliver to the users
a letter of consent and a fact sheet with the activities that must perform on a
specific user-interface. For the execution of activities, it is recommended to use
the guided tasks method, that is, the participants will be dictated aloud to tasks
they must perform. As part of the strategy, it is also suggested recording the
tests in order to monitor the interaction of users with the application. This with
the purpose of finding usability problems in the user interface.
In the extraction and preparation (phase 2) a selection of data is made to obtain a base source of biosignals on which subsequent analyzes will be made. This
selection and preparation are made because a large amount of data is commonly
collected, whose measurements contain noise and atypical values, which need to
be filtered, deleted and even transformed for the application of a particular technique. In addition, this type of biosignals are registered in small timestamps as
seconds and milliseconds, and even in nanoseconds. Subsequently, to eliminate
redundancies and possible high dimensionalities it is advisable to do an analysis
of correlations and dispersion of the data.
Biosignals analysis (phase 3), apart from statistical measurements as mean,
standard deviation, variance, covariance and other interest estimates, seeks to
identify patterns in the data, which were previously extracted and prepared.
This patterns identification is done through the use of one or more data mining
techniques, as clustering (hierarchical and partitional), association rules, correResearch in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

16

ISSN 1870-4069

Towards a Method for Biosignals Analysis as Support for the Design of Adaptive User-Interfaces

lations, regressions, decision trees, and artificial neural networks. These patterns
represent a set of interest characteristics about the users evaluated, as tastes
certain colors, sizes, format styles, presentation and other aspects of interest.
Subsequently, through the getting of patterns (phase 4), it is sought to interpret the patterns of users previously identified. The preferences of the users
about a certain type of interface are described, as colors, text size, size of the
icons, the position of the elements and other characteristics of interest. This
information from users could be especially useful as part of the definition of
requirements in the analysis and design of adaptive interfaces. Since the definition of these requirements is usually a complex task because it is necessary to
translate the software needs of users into a set of functions and restrictions.
In this sense, considering the approach of developing adaptive user-interfaces
(requirements specification, analysis, design and implementation), the analysis
of biosignals is intended to support the first stages of development, such as requirements specification, analysis, and design. In addition, these could be refined
by the biosignals. Consequently, biosignals could be useful not only for the development team but also for the user for whom the interface is intended. Therefore,
it is sought through the biosignals analysis to serve as a support mechanism for
the design of adaptive user-interfaces.

5

Conclusions

Technological advances in recent years have allowed the implementation of new
mechanisms for the design of adaptive user-interfaces, which seek to cover a
greater degree of satisfaction of users when interacting with them. Currently,
various techniques are used for the analysis and definition of requirements, which
allow the construction of prototypes that could be evaluated and determine
changes or improvements to the system, which is a practical method that results
in an executable software model.
Another practical way to include valuable information in the specification of
requirements is through the analysis and understanding of biosignals obtained
from users. For its capture, diverse devices exist that allow monitoring their
behavior related to the events. For this reason, it is important to consider new
mechanisms to find useful information to support the design of adaptive interfaces.
As part of the research, this document showed the advance of the design of
a method for the analysis of biosignals as support for the design of adaptive
user interfaces. This method consists of four stages: a) biosignals collection,
b) extraction and preparation, c) analysis, d) getting patterns. This proposal
could be especially useful because the information obtained from users could be
incorporated into the requirements specification phase of adaptive user-interface
design.
As future work of this proposal, it is contemplated to make a practical experimentation on the biosignals analysis to a group of users. The objective is to
make an incremental and systematic development of the proposal of extraction
ISSN 1870-4069

17

Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

Heber Avalos-Viveros, Guillermo Molero-Castillo, Edgard Benitez-Guerrro, Everardo Bárcenas

and analysis of biosignals as support for the design of adaptive user-interfaces.

Acknowledgments. This work was partially supported by the National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT) of Mexico, as part of the project
Cátedras CONACYT ”Infraestructura para agilizar el desarrollo de sistemas
centrados en el usuario” Ref. 3053. The first author was also supported by
CONACYT through a MSc. scholarship, Ref. 629916.

References
1. Abdulkader, S.N., Atia, A., Mostafa, M.S.M.: Brain computer interfacing: Applications and challenges. Egyptian Informatics Journal 16(2), 223–226 (2015)
2. Acosta, A., Zambrano, N.: Importancia, problemas y soluciones en el diseño de la
Interfaz de Usuario. Universidad de Oriente (2006)
3. Burnet, D.H., Turner, M.D.: Expanding EEG research into the clinic and classroom
with consumer EEG Systems. Georgia state university (2017)
4. Cuenca, J.N.: Informática médica: Análisis de bioseñales (2008), http://
slideplayer.es/slide/4617122/
5. Eichler, Z.: Towards Multimodal Adaptive User Interfaces. Ph.D. thesis,
Masarykova univerzita, Fakulta informatiky (2014)
6. Fernández, M.J., Ullate, J.M.A., Salvador, J.A.: Interfaces de usuario: diseño de la
visualización de la información como medio de mejorar la gestión del conocimiento
y los resultados obtenidos por el usuario. In: Actas del V Congreso ISKO-España.
pp. 42–54 (2001)
7. Girouard, A., Solovey, E.T., Hirshfield, L.M., Peck, E.M., Chauncey, K., Sassaroli,
A., Fantini, S., Jacob, R.J.: From brain signals to adaptive interfaces: using fnirs
in hci. In: Brain-Computer Interfaces, pp. 221–237. Springer (2010)
8. Hayes, G.R.: Knowing by doing: action research as an approach to hci. In: Ways
of Knowing in HCI, pp. 49–68. Springer (2014)
9. Heger, D., Putze, F., Amma, C., Wand, M., Plotkin, I., Wielatt, T., Schultz, T.:
Biosignalsstudio: a flexible framework for biosignal capturing and processing. In:
Annual Conference on Artificial Intelligence. pp. 33–39. Springer (2010)
10. Kaniusas, E.: Fundamentals of biosignals. In: Biomedical Signals and Sensors I,
pp. 1–26. Springer (2012)
11. Lauesen, S.: User Interface Design: A Software Engineering Perspective. AddisonWesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA (2005)
12. Marcos, M.C.: Hci (human computer interaction): concepto y desarrollo. El profesional de la información 10(6), 4–16 (2001)
13. Martı́nez, J.G.: Ingenierı́a biomédica. Universidad de Valencia (2004)
14. Moro, R., Berger, P., Bielikova, M.: Towards adaptive brain-computer interfaces:
Improving accuracy of detection of event-related potentials. In: Semantic and Social
Media Adaptation and Personalization (SMAP). pp. 34–39. IEEE (2017)
15. MyUI: Basic concepts relevant for creating an adaptative myui application (2017),
http://myuidocumentation.clevercherry.com/overview/basic-concepts
16. Narayanan, S., Koppaka, L., Edala, N., Loritz, D., Daley, R.: Adaptive interface
for personalizing information seeking. CyberPsychology & Behavior 7(6), 683–688
(2004)
Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

18

ISSN 1870-4069

Towards a Method for Biosignals Analysis as Support for the Design of Adaptive User-Interfaces

17. Patrick, E.: Intelligent User Interfaces: Introduction and Survey. Delft University
of Technology (2003)
18. PMOinformatica:
Tecnicas
de
levantamiento
de
requerimientos
software
(2016),
http://www.pmoinformatica.com/2016/08/
tecnicas-levantamiento-requerimientos.html
19. Porta, M.: Human–computer input and output techniques: an analysis of current
research and promising applications. Artificial Intelligence Review 28(3), 197–226
(2007)
20. Prendinger, H., Mori, J., Mayer, S., Ishizuka, M.: Character-based interfaces adapting to users’ autonomic nervous system activity. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems E0-D, 1–6 (2003)
21. Salazar-Ospina, O.M., Rodrı́guez-Marı́n, P.A., Ovalle-Carranza, D.A., DuqueMéndez, N.D.: Interfaces adaptativas personalizadas para brindar recomendaciones
en repositorios de objetos de aprendizaje. Tecnura 21(53), 107–118 (2017)
22. Sánchez-Morillo, D.: Procesado y transmisión de señales biomédicas para el diagnóstico de trastornos y enfermedades del sueño. Ph.D. thesis, Universidad de
Cádiz (2008)
23. Schmidt, A.: Biosignals in human-computer interaction. interactions 23(1), 76–79
(2015)
24. Shahmohammadi, F., Hosseini, A., King, C.E., Sarrafzadeh, M.: Smartwatch based
activity recognition using active learning. In: Connected Health: Applications, Systems and Engineering Technologies (CHASE). pp. 321–329. IEEE (2017)
25. Sitou, W., Spanfelner, B.: Towards requirements engineering for context adaptive
systems. In: Computer Software and Applications Conference. 31st Annual International. vol. 2, pp. 593–600. IEEE (2007)
26. Vartak, A.: Biosignal Processing Challenges In Emotion Recognitionfor Adaptive
Learning. Ph.D. thesis, University of Central Florida (2010)
27. Voida, S., Patterson, D.J., Patel, S.N.: Sensor data streams. In: Ways of Knowing
in HCI, pp. 291–321. Springer (2014)
28. White, F.: Data fusion lexicon. In: data fusion subpanel of the joint directors of
laboratories technical panel for C3. pp. 1–13 (1991)
29. Wu, L., Akgunduz, A.: User interface design for artistic expression based on biosignals: An eeg feature extraction method based on weak periodic signal detection.
In: Innovative Design and Manufacturing (ICIDM), Proceedings of the International Conference on. pp. 5–10. IEEE (2014)

ISSN 1870-4069

19

Research in Computing Science 147(11), 2018

