Reality and Perception: Activity monitoring and
data collection within a real-world smart home
Sarah Fallmann∗ , Ismini Psychoula∗ , Liming Chen∗ , Feng Chen∗ , Julie Doyle† and Darpan Triboan∗
∗ School

of Computer Science and Informatics, De Montfort University, Leicester, UK
Email: {sarah.fallmann, ismini.psychoula, liming.chen, fengchen}@dmu.ac.uk, darpan.triboan@my365.dmu.ac.uk
† CASALA, Dundalk Institute of Technology, Co.Louth, Ireland
Email: julie.doyle@casala.ie

Abstract—Smart home technologies have been developing rapidly
in the last few years. However, there is still a lack of annotated
rich datasets that can be used for different analysis purposes
by researchers. The motivation for this study is driven by the
need of self-management for chronic disease patients and the
often neglected privacy aspects. The study describes the extension
of an existing smart home environment at Great Northern
Haven (GHN) with ambient and wearable devices. The discussed
principles include the design of the experiment, data collection
strategies and encountered challenges in regards to the sensors,
connection problems and occupation with multiple inhabitants.

I. I NTRODUCTION
The population in developed countries is ageing. For Europe
this means, that the number of people above 65 years and
older will increase significantly between 2015 and 2060 causing almost double the amount in this age range [8], [14].
Therefore, some severe issues need to be addressed including
chronic diseases, which lead to the need of long term care.
The impact of more elderly on society is not only based on
costs, but is also linked to the lack of resources [8], [10].
This means in the future the number of caregivers will not
be sufficient to meet the demands of elderly, trying to live
independently or in care homes. The needs of elderly to stay
at home independently as long as possible, are addressed in
the field of Active and Assisted Living (AAL) which includes
home automation systems and intelligent environments. In this
context, information and communication technologies can help
the interaction with people and use the information of sensors
and actuators to detect where and what the people are doing
at the moment, in order to avoid risky situations [8].
However, the advances in AAL rely increasingly on personal
data. Such data are sensitive and therefore can lead to privacy
risks such as privacy of behaviour and action, privacy of
communication, privacy of data and image, privacy of location,
and privacy of association [2], [7]. It is also difficult to find
the right balance between individual privacy and availability
of data. The main challenges are: (1) The well-being of elderly
residents could be at risk if information is not accessible at the
right time; (2) Private data could be shared between different
systems putting the privacy of the resident at risk.
The overall aim of this research is to create an annotated
dataset that combines data from ambient, wearable and binary

sensors for multi-purpose analyses. The advantage of this data
collection will be the enrichment of an existing environment
with wearable and easy to apply ambient devices. This is
an improvement towards a system which can be adjusted in
private households providing independent living for individual
purposes. The environment is designed to be highly adaptable
and expendable at any time. The personalization will be based
on the needs of the inhabitants including privacy aspects,
chronic conditions and case of emergencies.
The study is structured in the following way. Section II
discusses the related work in regards to the research topics
addressed in this study and the data collection process. Section
III describes the user scenarios, data collection process and
activity monitoring. Section IV includes data prepossessing,
cleaning and fusion of the dataset. In Section V challenges of
the collection are outlined and discussed. Further work and
conclusions are summarized in Section VI.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Ambient assisted living data collection methods are currently
highly researched to allow elderly people, to live independently at home. There are a number of smart environments,
some focus on a single occupied smart home while others involve multiple apartments with residents living there for years.
Usually these environments monitor residents by using various
sensors and creating algorithms to recognize their behaviours
and extracting the information of daily living activities. However, most of the current research focuses on short activities
that are mainly performed in laboratory environments. In these
cases, the experiments are controlled and the activities are
carried out based on the requirements of the research. But in
a real world scenario it is difficult to predict the circumstances
under which daily activities will occur [11]. There is also a
lack of annotated reference datasets for researchers to apply
and assess their models. The reason is that the monitoring
of more complicated and even interleaved activities for a
longer period of time in a real home environments is more
difficult to achieve. That is because it requires continuous
real-time data gathering, as well as storage of large amounts
of information [1]. Data collection has been addressed by
different research groups in laboratory settings as well as
real world environments. There are smart home infrastructures

which already exist to address the issue of having real world
environmental settings [4], [6], [15]. Great Northern Haven
(GNH) is such an infrastructure consisting of 16 smart homes
equipped with ambient sensors and actuators. Older adults
have permanently occupied fifteen of the apartments since
2010 while the remaining apartment is used for research and
demonstration purposes [6]. These concepts mainly include
motion/light sensors, door sensors and temperature sensors.
To be adaptable to new rapidly growing technologies [12],
infrastructures need to be highly flexible to different devices.
This makes the approach applicable to every home and already
existing environments. The infrastructure in [12] is designed
for use cases of getting up, prepare meals using stove and
kitchen sink. The proposed system in this study is designed
for different research purposes and use cases including sleep
quality, daily behaviour and privacy issues.
III. S MART E NVIRONMENT D ESIGN AND S ENSOR
D EPLOYMENT S TRATEGIES
This Section deals with the smart environment setup, monitored activities following an use case approach and sensor
aspects including environmental and wearable devices.
A. Smart Environment Setup
The motivation for the environment design are (1) the selfmanagement for chronic diseases focusing on depressed and
chronic kidney disease patients. This includes discussion of
sleep efficiency calculation, self-management of fluid intake
and enrichment of daily activity recording with a mobile
Electroencephalography (EEG). The referred activities include
go-to-bed routines and daily activities in the kitchen and living
room. While the other aim (2) is to analyze the collected
dataset from a privacy and security perspective, where the
privacy risks will be evaluated based on the impact on individuals privacy. Threats will be identified by the use of smart
home sensors, time, location, activity and health and wellness
monitoring devices.
In this study, there are two basic sources of data. First,
data from embedded sensors in the existing GNH apartment’s
infrastructure. Second, from the additional sources of data
which include ambient and wearable sensors added in the
environment, as shown in Figure 1 and 2. Data collection
was performed for a continuous two weeks trial from two
researchers within the extended real-world smart home.
B. Activity Monitoring based on User Scenarios
The study follows an use case approach where common
daily behaviours were formulated in use cases and performed
afterwards. Sensor data is collected for different user scenarios
which are compatible for research topics of privacy, daily
living and sleep quality.

Fig. 1: Floor plan of DKIT smart environment with existing
(semi-filled, framed) and extended (filled) smart sensors.

Emotiv EEG
Garmin vivoactive HR
Shimmer Sensors
Samsung Galaxy S7 (edge)
H2OPal Smart Cup

Fig. 2: Wearable devices used during the study and their
respective location on the body.

1) Privacy: Privacy issues in the smart home environments
appear to be one of the most important factors that can affect
smart home technology adoption [3]. The use cases created
for this experiment combine daily activities with different
privacy invasive technology elements. In addition to the behaviour pattern analysis of these elements, they will also be
investigated from a privacy point of view. The collected data
will be analyzed based on the sensor type, the location, time,
activity while metric algorithms will be developed to measure
the sensitivity of the information they reveal and the potential
risk depending on who could have access to it.
2) Sleep Quality: Sleep quality is an important aspect of wellbeing, especially for elderly [5]. This aspect is one focus
of the study which is analysed including nighttime (Table I)
and daytime (Table II) sleeping patterns. Important features
will be extracted representing sleep quality to further apply
them in a weight function to represent night’s rest. These use
cases are designed for relevant conditions including healthy
elderly without problems, a depressed patient suffering from
insomnia and a chronic kidney disease patient (compare Table
I). Usually it is advised to keep nap duration during the day
under 30 minutes [13], as it effects the sleep quality during the
night. This topic is discussed controversially in the literature
[9]. Therefore this open issue needs further detailed research,
which is incorporated in the study by the use case described in
Table II. Data collected from the different user scenarios will

TABLE I: Use case “Sleep Quality assessment of healthy
elderly and chronic disease patients
Description

Actors:
Conditions:

Action
sequence:

The use case describes sleep quality measurements
within a smart environment including environmental and
wearable sensors for patients in different conditions.
Patient [healthy(HEA), depressed(DEP) suffering from
insomnia and suffering from chronic kidney disease(CKD)], Smart Home
Sleeping behaviour:
HEA normal
DEP problem related to lack of sleep, difficulties
falling asleep(onset), staying asleep(maintenance)
or waking up too early.
CKD problem related to waking up during the night,
sleep disturbances, need to use the toilet caused
by medication and fluid consumption.
1) Adjust required sensors for sleep.
HEA,DEP Withings Aura, Smartphone, camera
HEA,CKD Shimmer sensors, Smart-Watch,
Withings Aura, Smartphone
2) HEA
The person falls asleep .
DEP,CKD The person has difficulties to fall
asleep.
3) DEP
The person wakes up during the
night and has difficulties falling
asleep again.
CKD
The person wakes up during the
night to go to the bathroom.

TABLE IV: Use case ”Physical Activity of an Eldery Wearable Monitoring”
Description

The use case is related to the physical activity of an
elderly during the day.

Actors
Conditions:
Action
sequence:

Elderly, Smart Home
Elderly is inactive.

TABLE V: Use case “Hygiene - bed time and morning
routine”
Description

The use case describes hygiene for an elderly person
including environmental and wearable sensors during the
bed time and morning routine.

Actors
Conditions:
Action
sequence:

Elderly person, Smart Home
Elderly wants to go to bed or get up.

The use case is related to napping during the day.

Actors
Conditions:
Action
sequence:

Elderly, Smart Home
Elderly feels tired during the day.
1) Elderly adjusts sensors including Smart Watch,
Shimmer Sensors, Withings Aura, Smartphone
2) The person naps inside the bedroom.

TABLE III: Use case “Fluid Consumption”
Description

The use case illustrated the fluid consumption for an
elderly person using a Smart Cup.

Actors
Condition:
Action
sequence:

Elderly person, Smart Home
Person is thirsty.
1) The person feels thirsty.
2) The person goes to kitchen to fill the SmartCup
with a drink.
3) The person drinks.
4) Sensors in the SmartCup measures the quantity the
person drunk.

1) The person adjusts required sensors on the body
during the bathroom routine. (Smart Watch, Shimmer Sensors)
2) The person enters the bathroom
3) The environment measures the presence in the
bathroom, use of the tap, use of toilet, use of
shower and the accelerometer from Shimmer sensors.
4) The person starts the bathroom routine including
comb hair, wash face and hands, brush teeth, use
the toilet and shower if necessary

TABLE VI: Use case “Daily Activities”

TABLE II: Use case “Napping during the day”
Description

1) The person adjusts wearable device (Smart Watch)
on the body day and night.
2) The environment analyses the changes of presence
inside the house as well as the Smart Watch data
in and outside the house.

Description

The use case describes elderly person daily routine
including prepare meal/tea, eat, drink, watch television.

Actors
Conditions:
Action
sequence:

Elderly person, Smart Home
Elderly person performs daily activities.
1) The person adjusts the EEG Emotiv to measure
daily activities.
2) Activities are performed: prepare meal, prepare
tea, drink, eat, watch television, work
3) Emotiv device collects EEG data during the activities and the environment helps to clarify the
activities performed.
4) The person takes off the Emotiv.

TABLE VII: Use case “Electricity, Water and Heating Usage
Monitoring”
Description

The use case describes the monitoring of data through
consumption meters.

Actors
Conditions:

Elderly person, Smart Home
The smart house is monitoring the consumption in real
time

Action
sequence:

1) The smart home system aggregates information
from many different devices
2) The user can see their consumption statistics
3) This information could potentially reveal sensitive
information about the resident

be analyzed to extract further information for sleep efficiency.
3) Daily Behaviour: This Section refers to daily behaviour of
elderly, divided into sleep hygiene and daily behaviour aspects.
i Sleep hygiene is used as treatment for insomnia [13], [16]
which includes
light exposure measured via light sensors inside the
house and the time spent outside
exercises
amount measured with environmental
sensors and Smart Watch, see Table IV
fluid
consumption using a Smart Cup including caffeine consumption annotation,
compare Table III
environment
checking of noise level, humidity and
temperature inside the room
nap
duration, refer to Table II
routine
for bedtime is checked by environmental and wearable sensors, see Table V

TABLE IX: Extended wearable and environmental sensors for
the smart environments at GNH. The abbreviations R1, R2
stand for bedrooms of the residents, K for kitchen, B for
bathroom and N for the number of sensors.
Sensor type

N Location

Collected for

Shimmer Sensors
Camera
Smart Watch
Withings Aura
Samsung Galaxy
IPhone
H2OPal Smart Cup
EEG Emotiv

5
2
1
2
2
2
2
1

extremities, chest
bedroom(R1,R2)
wrist(R1)
bedroom(R1,R2)
bed(R1,R2)
smart home
smart home
head(R1)

daily activities, sleep
annotation
sleep, active
sleep
sleep
annotation
fluid intake
daily activities

Securifi
Sensors
Securifi
Sensors

3

cupboard(K),
wardrobe(R1,R2)
fridge(K),
cupboard(K),
toilet(B), tab(B)
tab(K),
cupboard(K),
wardrobe(R1)
bedrooms(R1,R2),
bathroom

open/close

Door
big
Door
small

4

Samsung Smart
Things Door
Sensors
MultiSensor6

4

Flood Sensor

1

3

ii General performed activities during the day in the
bathroom

use toilet, shower, wash face, brush teeth,
comb hair
kitchen
prepare food, eat, drink, wash-up
bedroom
sleep, nap, putting blinds up/down, making
bed, dress
livingroom watching TV, working, reading
The daytime activities were not only measured by environmental sensors but also extended by EEG measurements described
in the use case in Table VI. In Table VII the use case to monitor
electricity, water and heating usage is illustrated.
C. Sensor Deployment and Data Collection
The existing smart home at GNH consists of environmental
wired sensors including window, door, consumption usage,
PIR, lux and temperature sensors (refer to Table VIII). This
TABLE VIII: Existing smart environment setting from DKIT,
Abbreviation N indicates the number of sensors
Sensor type
Doors sensors
Window sensors
Electricity, water & heating usage
PIR sensors
Lux sensors
Temperature sensors

N
7
5
1
3
6
6

Location
doors
windows
boiler
ceiling
ceiling
walls

Detection
open/close
open/close
usage
movement
light
temperature

smart home was extended by wearable and environmental
devices like door, movement and flood sensors as well as
Shimmer sensors and Withings Aura, listed in Table IX. The
location of existing and extended sensors within the flat is
shown in Figure 1. In Figure 2 the wearable devices are
depicted those applied on the body like Shimmer sensors,
Emotiv EEG and Smart Watches as well as Smartphones and
Smart Cups.

bathroom

open/close
open/close
movement,
temperature, light,
humidity, vibration
water

Two different settings were designed for sleep quality assessment. In one setup Withings Aura and a Smartphone
under the pillow is collecting data over the entire night. The
second setting extends the first setup with a Smart Watch
and Shimmer sensors applied to the extremities and the chest.
The second setup is gathering data during the night and 3045 minutes long naps during the day. This Shimmer sensor
collects accelerometer, gyroscope, magnetometer, pressure and
temperature data. The Garmin vivoactive HR Smart Watch
gathers data about sleep stages, heart rate and movement,
whereas Withings Aura uses an air pillow under the mattress
to calculate sleep stages, heart rate, temperature, luminosity
and noise. The integrated Smartphone sensors collect data in
0.1 to 1 second updating rate. Fluid consumption is measured
with H2O Pal Smart Cup, gathering milliliter amount drunk
during the day. Emotiv EEG is collecting data of daytime
activities like preparing food, eating, making tea, drinking,
watching television or working on a laptop. Additionally,
binary sensors in the flat record different daily activities
continuously (compare Section III-B3).
IV. DATA P ROCESSING
This Section describes the processing of the dataset which is
currently in progress.
A. Data Pre-Processing and Cleaning
The data pre-processing of the collected dataset will include
data cleaning to remove erroneous and unwanted values, data
interpolation to deal with potential missing values and data
transformation to put the data into the correct formats. For
example, the values for temperature and date are in different

formats based on the type of sensor.
As the collected data are from different types of sensors in
a real environment there is the possibility that noisy and
redundant information is generated, for instance by discharged
batteries, failures in sensor readings and losses in wireless
transmission, as well as unforeseen events that occur in real
homes. To perform data cleaning, several filters will be used
which depend on the characteristics of the sensor and the
amount of people that were present. For example Bayes and
particle filters will be used to clean data from binary sensors in
scenarios with multiple residents present. A median filter will
be used to remove noise and avoid abnormal measurements
from the presence sensors. The noisy data collected from EEG
and Shimmer devices will be reduced by signal processing.
For the accelerometer a low pass filter will be used to remove
the gravity component from the values and high pass filters to
reveal the real acceleration.
B. Data Processing
Data from different devices is combined and related to activities within the smart environment using timestamps from
sensors and timestamps from annotation from Smartphone and
camera. The Smartphone contains a customised application
that allows the annotation of daily activities and their duration.
Camera data are used to get a ground truth for sleep movement
and annotating activities during EEG recordings. Smartphone
annotation is mainly used for daily activities mainly in the
bathroom, kitchen and bedroom (compare Section III-B3).
Before analyzing the collected data a risk model will be
developed that will be able to estimate privacy risks. The
model will include equations that take into account various
data inputs and parameters, and then calculate the likelihood
of potential privacy problems. This model will allow the
identification of privacy risks for the residents of smart homes
that could arise from the processing of personal information
the collected data contain.
Feature selection will be performed for Shimmer senors and
EEG recordings to extract relevant factors to be included in
activity recognition. For Shimmer data this activities include
daily activities as well as respiration, movement and sleep
position. The frequency of sensor collection is deviate. For
instance, Shimmer sensors on the extremities are collected
with a frequency of 50Hz and on the chest with 520Hz
and Smartphone sensor gathering has a frequency of 1-10Hz.
Therefore they will be processed independently and the outcomes will be combined. The Shimmer chest sensor is used
for respiration detection with the gathered frequency. Whereas
for position during the sleep the lowest frequency will be set
to all of the Shimmer devices including extremities and chest.
Withings Aura, Shimmer, Smart Watch, Smartphone device
recordings and environmental devices will be included in the
sleep quality calculation. This calculation is based on a weight
function using temperature, humidity, movement, heart rate,
sleep stages, noise level, light level, bed exists and physical
activity during the day. Physical exercise can effect the sleep

positively [9]. Therefore, the Smart Watch is used to extract
an activity level outside the home which will use steps and
heart rate during the day. Inside the home the activity level
is calculated based on the movement sensor activations. Fluid
intake will be analyzed using the Smart Cup data. Activity
recognition is applied on EEG recording and environmental
sensors. The change in behaviour after a good and bed night’s
rest will be represented correlating outputs from the single
data processing steps.
V. D ISCUSSION AND C HALLENGES
The focus of this Section are the challenges which had to be
faced during the study and how they are addressed during the
processing of data. This challenges include the sensor setup,
data collection, extraction and processing.
1) Hardware pre-setup: An ideal setting was established
which included binary and wearable sensors to be integrated
in the existing environment. At the start of the experiment
some difficulties were encountered in applying and pairing
some sensors in the home which had to be excluded in further
investigations. This included movement and door sensors.
Some sensors were not easy to install as their purpose was
changed. Door sensors were used as sink tap sensors gathering
data about temperature and detecting water flow. This was
difficult to apply in the bathroom and kitchen setting.
2) Connection difficulties: Failures of Bluetooth connection
and synchronization between wearable devices and Smartphones had to be faced during the real world environmental
study. Other difficulties are possible Internet connection problems, as some devices need this for their setup. The SmartCam
and Aura Withings were connected to the Internet to interact
with the cloud systems of the providers. This camera setup
allows not only the collection of ground truth, but also creates
a very privacy invasive scenario by uploading private video
recording to a company’s cloud service.
3) Malfunction: Device software challenges were another
issue, sometimes specific devices stopped recording data prematurely after a short duration or failed to connect correctly.
These difficulties lead to a lack of data during the experiment,
which will be met by an algorithmic methodology that can
handle incomplete and noisy datasets.
4) Data extraction: After activating the sensors the data
collection started, which was interrupted by some problems
with data transition and raw data extraction from third party
device providers. This means that some providers, do not give
access to the whole raw dataset from their devices. Other
devices have a complicated structure of output format which
has to be studied in detail to understand the overall output.
5) Data processing: The data processing step faces some
difficulties in correlating between timestamps and frequency
differences. The annotated information needs to be correlated

carefully, as some activities started earlier than the corresponding collection of data. The formats of the different extracted
datasets from providers have to be adjusted to be comparable
and able to integrate.
6) Occupation: The occupation of the smart home in regards
to the number of persons varied during the study. The main
challenge during data processing is the extraction of behaviour
patterns based on the inhabitants living in the smart home.
Also, visits to the smart environment from guests and external
researchers took place, which have to be taken into account
during the data processing step. This situation affects data
collection from the environmental devices.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND F UTURE W ORK
In this study a dataset is collected within a real world environment, that enables to conduct further research in context of
sleep, daily behaviour and privacy aspects. An existing smart
home at GNH equipped with wired sensors was extended by
a combination of wearable and environmental devices. The
gathering was continuously performed over a period of two
weeks with two permanent inhabitants. Due to the setting
including various devices, multiple use cases can be addressed
like hygiene, fluid consumption, wearable monitoring, sleep,
daily activities and energy consumption. The challenges during
the performance of the study have been the sensor setup,
occupation, data extraction and processing.
Collected data is going to be applied to algorithms extracting
features for sleep quality and behaviour analysis based on
environmental and wearable devices. First a sleep efficiency
calculation will be performed using parameters extracted from
wearable and ambient devices. Further both aspects will be
linked to each other representing the changes on behaviour
after a high and low rated night’s rest. The idea is to extract
factors which could be dealt with further in sleep efficiency
calculations or be replaced by non-contact devices.
Further on, a framework will be developed to identify the
privacy risks based on who will access the data, in which
context data will be used and what the residents benefits or
risks will be from reveling this data. In order to estimate the
privacy impact, models will be developed that use identified
risks associated to the collected data. The probability that these
data become problematic for a resident whose personal information is processed and possibly shared by the system will be
calculated. The sensitivity of the information will be analyzed
based on how sensitive data is perceived to be depending on
the circumstances and varying personal preferences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been funded by the European Union Horizon2020 MSCA ITN ACROSSING project (GA no. 616757).
The authors would like to thank the members of the project
consortium for their valuable inputs. We would also like to
show our gratitude to Dundalk Institute of Technology for

hosting us in the Great Northern Haven, Netwell-CASALA
research smart home and providing their help and knowledge.
R EFERENCES
[1] Kevin Bouchard and Sylvain Giroux. Smart homes and the challenges
of data. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM International Conference on
PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, page 66.
ACM, 2015.
[2] Patrice Caire, Assaad Moawad, Vasilis Efthymiou, Antonis Bikakis, and
Yves Le Traon. Privacy challenges in ambient intelligence systems.
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, 8(6):619–644,
2016.
[3] Jane Chung, George Demiris, and Hilaire J Thompson. Ethical considerations regarding the use of smart home technologies for older adults: an
integrative review. Annual review of nursing research, 34(1):155–181,
2016.
[4] Aaron S. Crandall, Narayanan C. Krishnan, Brian L. Thomas, and
Diane J. Cook. Casas: A smart home in a box. Computer, 46:62–69,
2013.
[5] M. Jamal Deen. Information and communications technologies for
elderly ubiquitous healthcare in a smart home. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, 19(3):573–599, 2015.
[6] Julie Doyle, Andrea Kealy, John Loane, Lorcan Walsh, Brian O’Mullane,
Carl Flynn, Andrew Macfarlane, Brennon Bortz, R Benjamin Knapp,
and Rodd Bond. An integrated home-based self-management system to
support the wellbeing of older adults. Journal of ambient intelligence
and smart environments, 6(4):359–383, 2014.
[7] Rachel L Finn, David Wright, and Michael Friedewald. Seven types
of privacy. In European data protection: coming of age, pages 3–32.
Springer, 2013.
[8] Francisco Florez-Revuelta and Alexandros Andre Chaaraoui(Eds.). Active and Assisted Living: Technologies and Applications. IET, 2016.
[9] Leah A. Irish, Christopher E. Kline, Heather E. Gunn, Daniel J. Buysse,
and Martica H. Hall. The role of sleep hygiene in promoting public
health: A review of empirical evidence. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 22:23
– 36, 2015.
[10] Nelda McCall. Who Will Pay for Long Term Care? Insights from the
Partnership Programs. Health Administration Press, 2001.
[11] Qin Ni, Ana Belén Garcı́a Hernando, and Iván Pau de la Cruz. The
elderlys independent living in smart homes: A characterization of activities and sensing infrastructure survey to facilitate services development.
Sensors, 15(5):11312–11362, 2015.
[12] Thomas Reichherzer, Steven Satterfield, Joseph Belitsos, Janusz
Chudzynski, and Lamar Watson. An Agent-Based Architecture for
Sensor Data Collection and Reasoning in Smart Home Environments
for Independent Living, pages 15–20. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2016.
[13] Edward J Stepanski and James K Wyatt. Use of sleep hygiene in the
treatment of insomnia. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 7(3):215 – 225, 2003.
[14] European Union. The 2015 Ageing Report. Underlying Assumptions and
Projection Methodologies Technologies and Applications for Active and
Assisted Living. Current situation, 2014.
[15] Tim van Kasteren, Athanasios Noulas, Gwenn Englebienne, and Ben
Kröse. Accurate activity recognition in a home setting. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp
’08, pages 1–9, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.
[16] Annemieke van Straten, Tanja van der Zweerde, Annet Kleiboer, Pim
Cuijpers, Charles M. Morin, and Jaap Lancee. Cognitive and behavioral
therapies in the treatment of insomnia: A meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine
Reviews, pages –, 2017.

