User Experience Design for Brain-Computer Interfaces
to Support Interaction in Points of Interest
Lizbeth Peralta-Malváez, J. Alfredo Sánchez and Ofelia Cervantes
Depto. de Computación, Electrónica y Mecatrónica,
Universidad de las Américas Puebla,
San Andrés Cholula, Puebla, México
{lizbeth.peraltamz, alfredo.sanchez, ofelia.cervantes}@udlap.mx

Abstract. This paper discusses the potential of brain-computer interfaces (BCI)
in the interaction between users and objects in points of interest in a city. We
present an initial design of the user experience with BCI, aimed to include users
with disabilities but also to enhance the experience of the general public. This
design includes a physical space to be conditioned specifically for BCI so users
can interact with certain objects in a museum, as well as enhancements
throughout the museum based on BCI. We report results of a formative
evaluation of the main design concepts.
Keywords: Brain-Computer Interfaces, Points of Interest, Objects of Interest,
Augmented Reality, Accessibility.

1 Introduction
Many museums have been incorporating innovative technologies, such as multimedia
kiosks, audio tours and interactive displays [1- 3]. Unfortunately, people with some
disability cannot always enjoy these enhancements. For example, in Mexico only two
museums have programs for blind people. For people with hearing or speech
disabilities, only guided visits are offered using sign language [4].
In this context, brain-computer interfaces (BCI), which make it possible for users
to interact with computer systems through sensors of brain activity, offer great
opportunities for addressing the needs of disabled users as well as for enhancing
functionality available to the general public. This paper explores the use of BCI for
interacting with objects of interest (OIs) in a museum, in the context of the
REAUMOBILE project, discussed below.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, related work with
BCIs is presented; Section 3 further explores the needs of users with disabilities in the
context of POIs. Section 4 discusses an initial user experience design involving BCI,
whereas Section 5 presents results of a formative evaluation of the proposed design,
which relied on feedback provided by two focus groups and three individual
interviews. Finally, Section 6 discusses ongoing work and the conclusions we have
drawn thus far.

pp. 63–70; rec. 2014-08-01; acc. 2015-03-20

63

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

Lizbeth Peralta-Malváez, J. Alfredo Sánchez, Ofelia Cervantes

2 Related Work
A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a communication system that allows the user to
send messages to a computer with only brain activity [5]. In general, a BCI works as
follows: Neurons are connected to one another by dendrites and axons. When they
start to work, small electric signals are generated by ions on the membrane of each
neuron. Although paths followed by signals are insulated, some can be detected by
mechanisms such as electroencephalograms (EEG) or magnetic resonances. Signals
can be interpreted by a computer program and associated to activities as required by
the user [6].
BCI applications are often related to the goal of supporting users with disabilities.
Some examples include research to help patients control their prostheses and improve
signal reception. Nevertheless, BCIs can be used in other areas [7-10]. For the
purposes of this paper, device control, gaming and entertainment are areas of
particular importance and thus are discussed in further detail below. We also
summarize salient work and issues on usability and user experience involving BCI.
Device control. Various techniques have been developed in order to improve
control by the user in a BCI system. One example is the technique allows the user to
rely on only three commands: left, right and foot Motor Imagery (MI: brain signs are
generated when users imagine the movement of their own limbs). In addition, there
are two types of navigation: free (the user can select POIs) and assisted (the user can
rotate the camera in order to find a specific POI) [11]. Another example is Command
Selection Training (CST), which determines the subject’s initial response to an
oscillating visual stimulus. The brain produces a corresponding response and this
response can then be used to create a BCI command [12].
Gaming and entertainment. Control in games that rely on BCIs can be based on
the user’s affective state or on the user’s brain activity [13]. In the first case, the
system can detect the experience of the users in certain tasks by sensing their
cognitive activity. In the second case, researchers are using mostly MI, Event-Related
Potential (evoked by external stimuli to which the brain responds automatically),
evoked by artificial stimuli and oscillatory rhythms of the brain activity [14]. Games
such as World of Warcraft, Second Life and Son of Nor can be used now with BCIs
[15], [16].
Usability and User Experience with BCI. Research on usability with BCIs might
be just as important for their acceptance and widespread usage as their technological
aspects. Usability components in this context present some specific traits [14]:
Learnability and memorability: Sometimes performing a mental task to communicate
with the computer is new for most of the people. It has to be made clear to the users
what is expected from them if they want to use a BCI.
Efficiency: Some BCI applications can adapt the way they present information or
react to user input depending on the user’s psychological state.
Errors: Error Related Negativity (ERN) can be used in order to detect when users are
aware of their errors and undo previous movements.
Satisfaction: This is mostly related with the ease with which the user could learn and
memorize the control of the BCI and with which accuracy they could control the
system.

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

64

User Experience Design for Brain-Computer Interfaces to Support Interaction in Points of Interest

Although there has been progress in BCI applications, they still exhibit common
problems that can affect the user experience (UX). For example, users get exhausted
from the intense concentration they have to undergo in order to use a BCI system;
some distractions, like noise, can detonate unwanted commands; the environment can
produce internal effects such as changes in the user’s state; users cannot use headsets
for more than one hour; the sensor connection can take some time; there are chemical
processes which the EEG cannot sense; the signal may be weak and prone to
interference [6], [14], [17].

3 Use Scenario for BCI
REAUMOBILE is a project aimed to disseminate the cultural heritage and to improve
the experience of visitors and residents of a smart city. The project is exploring the
use of augmented reality, social networks and the interaction with existing sources of
media content of points of interest (POIs) such as museums, archeological sites and
religious buildings [18]. REAUMOBILE provides a platform that can be used in
mobile devices for visitors to have access to various information layers and
interactive features associated with objects of interest in POIs. Normally, anyone with
a smartphone is able to use REAUMOBILE functionalities, but in order to be more
inclusive, there are issues this project needs to consider: What happens with a person
who cannot hold a smartphone or a tablet due to physical disabilities? What happens
if a user cannot see or has visual limitations? How can someone on a wheelchair
enjoy the experience offered by REAUMOBILE? What about users with hearing and
speech disabilities?

4 UX Design for a BCI Scenario
Taking into account the challenges posed by users with disabilities, we have produced
an enhanced scenario for a museum in which BCIs are introduced. Fig. 1 illustrates
our scenario by means of a storyboard (Fig. 1).
As noted in the figure, a family that includes a disabled person decides to visit a
museum. A special area in the museum has been adapted to allow users to experience
various aspects of their objects of interest via BCI. This space can be considered an
interactive area for anyone interested, regardless of whether or not users have some
disability. In the BCI area, users can interact with specific OIs to find additional
information, to situate OIs in the context of the collection, and to manipulate 3D
models of the objects. This area should have the following characteristics (also
illustrated in the storyboard):
•Total silence, so users do not get distracted with noise of other museum visitors or
events.
•Engaging BCI applications, which may include videogames and collaborative
learning functionality. These should offer multiple skill levels so users can practice,

65

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

Lizbeth Peralta-Malváez, J. Alfredo Sánchez, Ofelia Cervantes

train the BCI and eventually become experts. Naturally, these applications will be
related to the OIs available in the area.
•Access to in-depth information about OIs as well as translation mechanisms for
OIs that are described in a language different from the user’s.
•3D models for some OIs so users can rotate them, play animations, scale them up
or down, and view their relationships with other OIs.
•Access to consulting museum services, such as location of wheelchair ramps,
elevators and other services required by visitors.
The specific case of a game that can be operated via BCI is illustrated with more
detail in Fig. 2, relying also on a storyboard (Fig. 2). With simple facial expressions
such as winking, users can select whether they want to perform a task or play a game.
Confirming the action can be accomplished by another pre-defined facial expression.
For users with visual disability, the system may produce voice expressions indicating
which button is being selected. The storyboard illustrates the case for a user who
selects a game (“Arrange”), and then is presented with options to complete level 0.
This level has two main objectives: the player gets used to the headset and to perform
all the tasks only by focusing his mind on the expect result, and the system is trained
in order to identify the player’s brain patterns and activities. In our example, the user
must visualize the desired movement with a cube, such as “up”, “down”, “left”,
“right”, etc. After level 0 is completed, the selected game can be played more
smoothly.

Fig. 1. Storyboard of the BCI area.

5 Formative Evaluation
In order to gather more information and different points of view regarding our
proposed scenario, we interviewed 11 users (6 male, 5 female) with the following
characteristics: Five with visual disability, two with motor disability, three without a
disability and one with hearing and speech disability. Two focus groups (the people

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

66

User Experience Design for Brain-Computer Interfaces to Support Interaction in Points of Interest

with visual disability and the group without a disability) and three individual
interviews were conducted in different days for two reasons: the difficulty of
transferring people with visual and motor disability to the same place and the
availability of the 11 users.

Fig. 2. Storyboard of the pattern game.
All subjects answered the same questionnaire, which included questions about the
following: frequency of visiting social places (parks, downtown and more),
difficulties they have when they go to those places, and if they have used a
technology adapted to their needs (question only for the people with a disability).
After applying the questionnaire, technical concepts were briefly explained, such as
BCI and AR. Then, the proposed scenario endowed with BCI was presented. Finally,
questions about which kind of activities and games users would like to add to the
system, about the display of the museum’s services and about how to encourage
people to go to the museum (Table 1).
The main ideas were explained in a different way for each type of user: For users
with visual disability we described verbally every detail, like what kind of objects the
area will have, the incorporation of large screens next to OIs, the expected interaction
sequences, and so on. We also followed this approach for one of our subjects with
motor disability due to her limited availability, as she was interviewed over the phone.
For people without a disability, another person with motor disability, and a subject
with hearing and speech disabilities, we used the storyboard presented in the Figure 1.
The following results were obtained:
•People with a disability reported the following difficulties: They depend on family
support to transport them or guide them, they find few services that consider their
disability (ramps, parking, etc.) and they generally have to make a great effort to
communicate with other people. The main difficulties found by people without a
disability are related to the distance to POIs and public transportation.
•Some features they would add to our design include: Audio- based, more detailed
and portable information (some would like to take it to their homes); exchanging
comments upon tour completion (whether they liked the area, what was their favorite
object and why, etc.); and cooperative interaction.
•Games suggested by users include linguistic games such as riddles or word play,
memory, cooperative games, treasure hunting and virtual routes of the museum.

67

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

Lizbeth Peralta-Malváez, J. Alfredo Sánchez, Ofelia Cervantes

•All of the users liked the idea that of being able to generate a route with the map
and see what services the museum has.
•Ten of the eleven participants would use the BCI system; only one user explained
that he had not visited a museum before, so he could not answer this question.
• Some of the users with a disability insisted that the museum should provide a web
site adapted to their needs. One suggested that on certain days, the government or the
museum’s administration could rent some buses in order to take disabled users to
these historical places.
Table 1. Main information of the focus groups and personal interviews.

Disability: V = Visual; M = Motor, DM = Deaf-Mute, N = None;
Technology: B = Braille, S = Speakers in the computer, C = Cell phone.

6 Conclusions and Future Work
This paper has discussed initial work in designing the user experience for interactive
systems that involve brain-computer interfaces. Rather than focusing on the
functionality offered by existing BCI technologies, we have started by working with
potential users and learning about their needs, capabilities and limitations. Although
they were enthusiastic about the proposed idea, people with disabilities expressed
their concern about the infrastructure of the museums that is not appropriate for them.
This is one of the reasons they do not go to these places and they also explained that
they do not want to be all the time in their houses or in their rehabilitation centers.
They want to coexist with other people without being excluded. At the same time,
they want to learn more about history, science and technology without their disability
limiting them in this regard.
As for future work, we plan to integrate the observations of our users. Low and
high fidelity prototypes will be created and usability and user experience tests in the
museum will be made. For an actual implementation, we currently are considering the
use of the Emotiv EPOC neuroheadset, as its Software Development Kit (SDK)

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

68

User Experience Design for Brain-Computer Interfaces to Support Interaction in Points of Interest

provides three detection libraries that will be useful [19]: Expressiv Suite (interprets
facial expressions in real time and uses an avatar that imitates them), Affectiv Suite
(shows real time changes in the subjective emotions experienced by the user) and
Cognitiv Suite (evaluates a user’s real-time brainwave activity to discern the user’s
conscious intent to perform distinct physical actions on real or virtual objects).
Finally, museums should publicize their BCI facilities among schools and rehab
centers for a better interaction with their objects and insist that anyone can use it,
regardless of whether or not they have a disability.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the support received from Conacyt through
the REAUMOBILE project number 192321. We also express our gratitude to
IECEDEVI, Ilumina Tu Vida, the Inclusion Department of UDLAP, for welcoming
us and allowing us to learn about their needs. Centro Sustenta was key in introducing
the authors to the first two institutions.

References
1. Conaculta.: Aprovecha el INAH las tecnologías multimedia para difundir el patrimonio
cultural. (2012). [Online]. Available FTP: http://www.conaculta.gob.mx/detallenota/?id=20789#.U7ke3vl5MkM
2. Conaculta.: Conaculta presenta la app del Atlas Cultural de México y guías turísticas
culturales. (2012). [Online]. Available FTP: http://www.conaculta.gob.mx/detallenota/?id=24358#.U7keJvl5MkM
3. Conaculta.: Garantizar el uso social e interactivo de multiplataformas digitales, demandan
especialistas. (2014). [Online]. Available FTP: http://www.conaculta.gob.mx/detallenota/?id=34760#.U7ka2_l5MkM
4. Conaculta.: Acciones de accesibilidad en beneficio de personas con discapacidad. (2011).
[Online].
Available
FTP:
http://www.inah.gob.mx/especiales/5374-acciones-deaccesibilidad-en-beneficio-de-personas-con-discapacidad
5. Lotte, F.: Brain-Computer Interfaces for 3D Games: Hype or Hope? Proceedings of the 6th
International Conference on Foundations of Digital Games (FDG '11). ACM (2011). 325327.
6. Grabianowski, E.: How Brain-computer Interfaces Work. (2007). [Online]. Available FTP:
http://computer.howstuffworks.com/brain-computer-interface.htm.
7. Van Erp, J., Lotte and F., Tangermann, M.: Brain-Computer Interfaces: Beyond Medical
Applications. (2012). [Online]. Available FTP: http://lifesciences.ieee.org/articles/114brain-computer-interfaces-beyond-medical-applications
8. Krishnaswamy, K. and Kuber, R.: Toward the Development of a BCI and Gestural Interface
to Support Individuals with Physical Disabilities. Proceedings of the 14th international
ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility (ASSETS '12). ACM
(2012). 229-230.
9. Marchesi, M. and Riccò, B.: BRAVO: A BRAin Virtual Operator for Education Exploiting
Brain-Computer Interfaces. CHI '13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA '13). ACM (2013). 3091-3094.
10. Anthony, S.: Berkeley researchers replace passwords with passthoughts by reading your
mind. (2013). [Online]. Available FTP: http://www.extremetech.com/computing/152827berkeley-researchers-authenticate-your-identity-with-just-your-brainwaves-replacepasswords-with-passthoughts
69

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

Lizbeth Peralta-Malváez, J. Alfredo Sánchez, Ofelia Cervantes

11. Lotte, F. et al.: Exploring Large Virtual Environments by Thoughts Using a Brain–
Computer Interface Based on Motor Imagery and High-Level Commands. Presence:
Teleoper. Virtual Environ. 19, 1 (February 2010), 54-70.
12. Chung Chen, S. et al.: The Use of a Brain Computer Interface Remote Control to Navigate
a
Recreational
Device.
(2013).
[Online].
Available
FTP:
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/mpe/2013/823736/
13. Nijholt, A.: BCI for Games: A ‘State of the Art’ Survey. Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Entertainment Computing (ICEC '08). Springer-Verlag (2008).
225-228.
14. Plass-Oude Bos, D. et al.: Brain-Computer Interfacing and Games in Brain-Computer
Interfaces: Applying our Minds to Human-Computer Interaction. Springer. (2010). 149-178.
15. Neurogadget.: Emotiv-Compatible Son of Nor game successfully hits its kickstarter goal.
(2013). [Online]. Available FTP: http://neurogadget.com/2013/06/03/emotiv-compatibleson-of-nor-game-successfully-hits-its-kickstarter-goal/8131
16. Neurogadget.: Second Life avatars controlled via Brain-Computer Interface. (2011).
[Online]. Available FTP: http://neurogadget.com/2011/07/08/second-life-avatars-controlledvia-brain-computer-interface/2303
17. Pires, G. et al.: Evaluation of brain-computer interfaces in accessing computer and other
devices by people with severe motor impairments. (2012). [Online]. Available FTP:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050912007946
18. REAUMOBILE.: Proyecto REAUMOBILE: Realidad Aumentada con dispositivos
móviles. Proyecto CONACYT- OSEO no. 192321. (2014). [Online]. Available FTP:
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/7594275/ReauMobile/in dex.html
19. Emotiv.: Emotiv EPOC User Manual Headset and software setup for your Emotiv EPOC
neuroheadset. (2014). [Online]. Available FTP: https://emotiv.zendesk.com/hc/enus/articles/201222455- Where-can-I-find-a-user-manual-

Research in Computing Science 89 (2015)

70

