138

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Co-Located Multimodal Sensing: A Next Generation
Solution for Wearable Health
Valentin Goverdovsky, Member, IEEE, David Looney, Member, IEEE, Preben Kidmose, Senior Member, IEEE,
Christos Papavassiliou, Senior Member, IEEE, and Danilo P. Mandic, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— A novel physiological sensor which combines electrical and mechanical modalities is introduced. The electrical
component behaves as a standard electrode and detects changes
in bioelectrical potential, whereas the mechanical component
comprises an electret condenser microphone with a thin and
light diaphragm, making it sensitive to local mechanical activity
but immune to global body movements. A key feature of the
proposed sensor is that the microphone is positioned directly on
top of the electrode component (co-location). In conjunction with
co-located electromechanical sensing, the ability of the electrode
to flex allows for motion to be detected at the same location where
it corrupts the electrical physiological response. Thus, the output
of the mechanical sensor can be used to reject motion-induced
artifacts in physiological signals, offering improved recording
quality in wearable health applications. We also show that the
co-located electrical and mechanical modalities provide derived
information beyond unimodal sensing, such as pulse arrival time
and breathing, thus enhancing the utility of the proposed device
and highlighting its potential as a diagnostic tool.
Index
Terms— Multimodal
sensing,
electrophysiology,
electrocardiography, electroencephalography, biosensors, noise
cancellation.

I. I NTRODUCTION

T

HE costs of healthcare are rapidly becoming a burden
in many developed countries, taking up a significant
proportion of their GDPs. Technological advances are envisaged to play crucial role in reducing these costs, through e.g.
continuous monitoring of chronic patients outside the clinic.
The emergence of patient-centred healthcare, which includes
out-of-clinic monitoring and diagnosis, is facilitated by the
rapid miniaturisation of electronics and improvements in battery capacity, gradually making wearable health technologies a
reality. Commercial non-clinical products for recording cardiac
function (e.g. Basis) and even brain function (e.g. Emotiv,
Mindo) are already available. Nevertheless, there are several
obstacles to be overcome before wearable devices become
reliable clinical tools; in particular there is scope for significant
improvements at the sensor level.

Manuscript received April 9, 2014; revised June 24, 2014; accepted June 26,
2014. Date of publication July 10, 2014; date of current version November 5,
2014. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving
it for publication was Dr. Ravinder S. Dahiya.
V. Goverdovsky, D. Looney, C. Papavassiliou, and D. P. Mandic are
with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial
College London, London SW7 2AZ, U.K. (e-mail: goverdovsky@
ic.ac.uk;
david.looney06@imperial.ac.uk;
c.papavas@imperial.ac.uk;
d.mandic@imperial.ac.uk).
P. Kidmose is with the Department of Engineering, Aarhus University,
Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark (e-mail: pki@eng.au.dk).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSEN.2014.2338612

Physiological sensors employ different recording modalities. Typical examples are sensors for electrical potentials
(electrodes); electrochemical sensors such as blood glucose,
pH and ISFET sensors; optical sensors for oximetry or blood
gas measurements; and accelerometers as well as other transducers, which record mechanical displacements. The diagnosis
of a specific health condition often requires a specific recording modality. For instance, the electrocardiography (ECG)
represents the gold standard for estimating heart rate variability (HRV), while mechanical observations from transducers or
photoplethysmography (PPG) recordings are used to determine
the pulse transit time (PTT). Furthermore, some physiological
variables can only be determined by combining different
sensor modalities, such as cardiac pulse arrival time (PAT).
Current electrode technologies are now established in many
clinical settings, however, they are typically developed to
obtain low electrical impedance between the instrumentation
equipment and the body. In practice, one of the biggest
challenges associated with physiological recordings are the
motion artefacts induced by relative movements between the
electrode and the skin, which affect the electro-chemical
electrode-skin interface, thus causing interference. Despite a
significant effort to develop mechanically stable electrode-skin
interfaces, current electrodes are still prone to motion artefacts
as well as other skin-related effects [1], [2] (e.g. skin stretch).
Research in electrode technology has primarily focused on
enabling physiological recordings without the conductive gel;
while this provides greater user comfort, it typically increases
the level of signal degradation due to motion artefacts. Even
in controlled environments where movements of a subject are
constrained, modern electrodes frequently provide suboptimal
signal quality. This is particularly detrimental when dealing
with vulnerable populations [3] such as the elderly and those
suffering from neurodegenerative diseases (e.g. Parkinson’s
disease).
While both electrodes and mechanical sensors (e.g. PPG)
suffer from skin-contact movement, such motion artefacts may
not be a disadvantage if the inferences from sensors of different modalities are combined to identify and reject the artefact.
Early work by Hamilton et al. [2], [4] investigated how to
augment standard electrodes in recording ECG with stretch
and optical sensors which measure movement nearby the
electrodes. The estimates of the artefacts were then computed
using signal processing and subtracted from corrupted ECG to
obtain the clean/desired signal. Similarly, Devlin et al. [5] and
more recently Kim et al. [6] used electrode-skin impedance
measurements as a means of motion artefact rejection. Other

1530-437X © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

GOVERDOVSKY et al.: CO-LOCATED MULTIMODAL SENSING: A NEXT GENERATION SOLUTION FOR WEARABLE HEALTH

139

Fig. 1. Concept of the multimodal sensor which measures electrical and
mechanical responses from the same location on the body (co-location).

approaches used magneto-resistive sensors [7], accelerometers [8], pressure sensors [9] and combinations of these [10] as
well as electrode-skin half-cell potential monitoring [11]. Far
less multimodal research has been conducted in the area of
artefact removal for electroencephalography (EEG), yet this is
much more challenging as the EEG potentials are extremely
weak (tens of microvolts) [12] and are often much smaller
than the motion potentials. A recent study used a tri-axial
accelerometer placed on the electrode cap to reduce motion
artefacts caused by head movements [3].
All this highlights the need for multimodal sensors that
combine electrical and mechanical physiological activity to
perform sensor-level fusion for multi-feature diagnosis and to
enable greater robustness in wearable scenarios. In mechanical
sensing, it is desirable that only the activity with respect to
the skin surface be detected, i.e. the body of the subject
must act as a frame of reference – local sensing. This is
clearly not the case when using e.g. an accelerometer as it
detects global body movements as well as local ones, its output
therefore contains additional components not related to movement artefacts. Additionally, we emphasise the importance of
co-located sensing, where both modalities are recorded from
exactly the same location. This promises critical advantages
in artefact rejection scenarios as, otherwise, the artefact may
not be present within all modalities.
To this end, we propose to combine an electrode with a
mechanical transducer to obtain a robust and reliable signal
acquisition unit that satisfies both local and co-located criteria,
as shown in Figure 1. Here, the transducer is mounted directly
on top of the electrode, hence both elements are co-located and
integrated inside a single miniature package. The mechanical
transducer is chosen so as to be sensitive only to the local
electrode movements and has the body surface of a subject
as a frame of reference. Both modalities of the combined
sensor operate concurrently, so that motion-induced artefacts
are captured by the transducer directly through the electrode,
thus ensuring high sensitivity and accuracy of motion artefact
estimation via the mechanical component.
We also show that the capabilities of the proposed
co-located sensor extend beyond the denoising of the electrical output as it provides means of recording a wide
range of mechanical biosignals, e.g. arterial/venous pulsation,
respiration; these are obtained either separately or in conjunction with the electrical activity. The separate modalities of
the proposed sensor are also shown to provide additional bio-

Fig. 2.

Detailed construction of the multimodal sensor.

medical parameters like PAT, which is valuable in estimating
blood pressure variability. In summary, the proposed device
replaces several individual sensors at no loss in sensitivity, thus
reducing clutter and lending itself to applications in emerging
wearable sensing systems.
II. M ULTIMODAL P HYSIOLOGICAL S ENSOR
The proposed sensor is a single device that records two
modalities from the same body location. This is achieved
through augmentation of the electrode with a miniature electret
condenser microphone (ECM). For the prototype, we have
chosen a 9723 GX model from Sonion, primarily developed
for hearing aids applications, it has a high baseline sensitivity
of −33 dBV/Pa at 1 kHz, a very low current consumption
of only 35 µA and low frequency cut-off at 20 Hz. From
a mechanical-motion point of view the cut-off at 20 Hz is
relatively high and preferably should be even lower, but it
is a design feature of the electret microphone and is one of
the lowest in its class.
A. Construction of the Multimodal Sensor
The proposed sensor yields a reliable estimate of the motion
artefact by sensing the mechanical displacement through the
electrode mounted directly on top of the sound hole on the
front face of the microphone, as shown in Figure 2.
The microphone, that provides the mechanical modality of
the sensor, is an active electret condenser type and comprises
two capacitor plates. One of the plates is formed by a thin
and light (low inertia) diaphragm on which the charge is
deposited during manufacturing. The backplate consists of
a rigid piece of metal connected to the microphone casing.
Compression waves pass through the hole on the front face
of the casing and the geometry of the hole determines, in
part, the frequency response of the microphone. The waves
arriving at the microphone cause the diaphragm movement,
leading to changes in distance between the capacitor plates.
Such changes in capacitance produce changes in the potential
difference between the plates which is then amplified, hence
three connections on the microphone: positive supply, negative

140

Fig. 3.
Principle of multimodal sensor. (a) The diaphragm inside the
mechanical transducer has very small mass, thus body movements which do
not cause displacements of the electrode with respect to skin are not detected.
(b) Abrupt movements leading to displacements of the sensor with respect
to the skin are detected by the mechanical transducer directly through the
surface; such a mechanical signal can be used to denoise the electrical signal.

supply and signal. The negative supply contact is connected
to the casing of the microphone which, in turn, is connected
to the backplate of the capacitor. Hence, although the casing
is conductive and therefore capable of detecting electrical
activity, it cannot be used as an electrode.
The electrical modality of the sensor is obtained by first
sealing the microphone with several layers of thin flexible
insulating material, ensuring that there is a pocket of air
formed above the sound hole. Subsequently, a layer of flexible
conductive material is applied, followed by an attachment of
a thin wire. In the last step, several more layers of a flexible
conductor are deposited on top of the wire.
The flexibility of the electrode ensures that compression
waves caused by skin movement propagate freely into the
sound hole, where they are detected by the microphone. Other
forms of mechanical excitation directly beneath the electrode
can also be sensed. The diaphragm in the microphone has
very small mass (and therefore negligible inertia), so that it is
sensitive only to local mechanical activity and to a large extent
immune to whole or global body movements, as depicted in
Figure 3.
B. Sensor Characterisation
The electrically sensitive part of the proposed device was
found to have similar impedance characteristics to those of
standard electrodes used for biosignal acquisition. It has also
shown good resistance to wear and tear as well as negligible
impedance degradation after a month of regular usage (several
times a week).
The mechanical part of the sensor was characterised through
a number of tests designed to investigate its linearity and sensitivity over frequency. The device was placed on a vibration
plate (VP) to obtain an estimate of its frequency response in
a scenario comparable to motion-induced displacements along
the sensor/skin interface. The electrically conductive face of
the sensor that is attached to the skin (see Figure 2) was
fixed to the VP with a strong double-sided adhesive tape
and also covered with several layers of medical tape. Such
an arrangement is a good model of a sensor placed over a
pulsating region on the human body, e.g. at the radial artery
site. The displacement of the plate was set to 1 mm and the
frequency was varied over a 2 – 50 Hz range. These settings
formed a reasonable compromise allowing us to characterise
the sensor over the majority of the frequencies of interest

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 4. Frequency response of the mechanical part of the multimodal sensor.
The sensor was firmly attached to the vibration plate oscillating at a 1 mm
displacement amplitude and the frequency was varied over a 2 – 50 Hz range.

Fig. 5. An overlay plot of the mechanical output of the multimodal sensor
and the output of a PPG sensor. Both signals were filtered to the 1 – 30 Hz
range and the PPG signal was scaled to the same amplitude range as the
transducer signal.

in typical electrophysiological recordings, without introducing
undesirable artefacts not related to sensor characteristics.
Figure 4 shows the transfer function based on the mechanical output of the sensor. Observe that in the experimental frequency range the mechanical response of the sensor
remained within a 3 dB window, exhibiting good linearity in
the amplitude characteristic across frequency. As discussed
earlier, the microphone has low frequency cut-off at around
20 Hz and based on information provided by Sonion, different
units of the same model have different roll-off rates at below
that frequency. This implies that the microphone is expected
to act as a differentiator for very low frequency acoustic
signals (non-linear amplitude characteristic of the frequency
response). The likely reason for the observed linearity in
Figure 4 is that the characteristics of the microphone have
been modified by sealing its front face with a flexible membrane, thereby creating an insulated pocket of air between the
electrode and the diaphragm inside the device. Consequently,
any movement (perpendicular to the skin) of the conductive
membrane causes changes in pressure inside that pocket of
air, which in turn leads to a corresponding movement of the
diaphragm. Motion of the diaphragm is coupled to the motion
of the membrane, thus enabling the key feature of the proposed
device – its high sensitivity to mechanical displacements of the
flexible electrode.

GOVERDOVSKY et al.: CO-LOCATED MULTIMODAL SENSING: A NEXT GENERATION SOLUTION FOR WEARABLE HEALTH

Fig. 6.
The Pearson correlation coefficient between PPG-derived and
MPG-derived PP intervals for a healthy male subject of age 27.

The linear response to the displacement of the electrode
membrane was next verified in the considered frequency range
for a real world physiological scenario, whereby the device
was placed inside a finger clip next to the phototransistor
of the photoplethysmography sensor HRM-2511E by Kyoto
Electronics Co. Figure 5 shows the mechanical output of the
sensor (MPG) together with the PPG waveform. Observe that
the photo- and mechanical- plethysmography waveforms are
highly correlated, confirming that the microphone within the
multimodal sensor is capable of producing a good proxy of
the PPG waveform. The sensitivity of the ECM is high enough
to replicate even minute details of the PPG signal, such as the
dicrotic notch; the time difference between the systolic and
the diastolic peaks can be readily measured as well. To further illustrate the good correspondence between the standard
PPG and the MPG, we have evaluated the Pearson correlation
coefficient between beat-to-beat changes of the peak-to-peak
interval (PPI) derived from photo- and mechanical- plethysmography waveforms from a healthy subject. Figure 6 demonstrates a high correlation between the estimates from a 300 s
recording (correlation coefficient 0.9954).
III. E NHANCED R ECORDING Q UALITY
The modification of skin impedance and its half-cell potential in response to mechanical, electrical or thermal stimulation
is well established, first observed in the 1920’s and investigated by numerous authors since (see [1], [13]). The skin
potential differs from that of the body interior, on average,
by −15 mV on the forearm, and in general can vary between
10 mV and −70 mV [1]. There is a consensus that mechanical
stimulation of the skin (e.g. stretching) can induce changes
in its impedance and half-cell potential, thus interfering with
other electrophysiological measurements. On repeated stimulation, and in the absence of sufficient relaxation time, the
magnitude of the skin response to mechanical stimulation
progressively decreases; the response to mechanical stimulation also decreases if the skin is abraded. The above-mentioned
effects are the primary cause of motion artefacts in nonpolarisable electrodes (e.g. Ag/AgCl) [14]. On the other hand,

141

Fig. 7. Motion artefact detection. Top panel: the EEG signal corrupted with
motion artefact together with the clean EEG obtained by averaging the signals
from four standard electrodes. Middle panel: the difference between the noisy
and clean EEG signal. Lower panel: the mechanical output of the multimodal
sensor.

dry electrodes, being metallic (e.g. flexible electrode in the
proposed sensor), form a capacitive interface, and thus have an
additional half-cell potential established between the electrode
surface and the skin. In such scenarios the primary cause of
motion artefacts is the change in dimensions of the contact
interface and relative movement of the electrode and the skin.
In particular, these phenomena represent a significant problem in EEG applications where the signal of interest is
typically much weaker than the motion-induced artefacts.
The conventional way of dealing with such artefacts is to
detect their onset and subsequently discard the contaminated
part of the recording. This reduces the size of the datasets
and introduces discontinuities, leading to loss of information.
In addition, if the motion artefacts do not have large amplitudes, it can be difficult to distinguish the underlying EEG,
which leads to incorrect analysis. Advanced signal processing
solutions can be used to identify and reject artefacts, e.g. based
on independent component analysis [15]. Although extensions
of such approaches exist for single channel analysis [16], they
perform optimally in multi-channel scenarios.
A. Motion Artefact Rejection
To evaluate the ability of the proposed sensor to detect
motion-induced artefacts in EEG signals, the multimodal
sensor was attached to the middle of a subject’s forehead
using medical tape. Four standard electrodes were placed
at a distance of 3 cm from the sensor and equidistant from
each other. The average of the signals from these electrodes
establishes the ground truth, i.e. the clean/desired EEG signal.
All of the five electrical signals were measured with respect
to the standard reference electrode placed on the right earlobe.
The microphone component of the sensor was powered with
a Duracell CR2032 coin cell. The g.tec g.USBamp unit was
used for data acquisition of all the signals (five electrical
and one mechanical) at a sampling frequency of 256 Hz.
All the electrodes, including the electrode component of the
multimodal sensor, were gelled with standard EEG electrolyte
and the skin on the forehead was abraded.
The recordings were of approximately 45 s duration. The
first 7 s were artefact free, subsequently the multimodal sensor

142

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

they can be combined to improve the reliability and accuracy
of the physiological readings, thereby enhancing the utility of
the sensor as a diagnostic tool.
A. Cardiac Activity

Fig. 8. Motion artefact removal. Top panel: clean/desired and corrupted EEG
signals. Middle panel: desired and denoised EEG signals. Lower panel: the
squared error prior to and after denoising.

was lightly pressed and rubbed in different directions with
a finger, monotonically as well as abruptly, simulating the
motion-induced artefact. The resultant signals from one of
the experiments, filtered to 1 – 40 Hz range, are shown in
Figure 7. The middle and the lower panels illustrate that the
EEG error signal and the mechanical output of the sensor are
highly correlated, verifying that the mechanical modality of
the sensor is an accurate proxy of the motion-induced artefact
and can be used to denoise the electrical output.
A tool based on multivariate empirical mode decomposition
(MEMD), see [17] for more details, was applied to perform
motion artefact rejection of the electrical signal (EEG) based
on the mechanical signal. Figure 8 shows approximately 5 s
of data; observe that the denoised waveform very closely
follows the true EEG signal. The proposed sensor therefore
enables high quality continuous EEG recordings in natural
environments. Note that the considered scenario is particularly
challenging, because the motion-induced artefact produces
disturbances of approximately the same amplitude as the
EEG signal itself, proving that the microphone is easily
capable of detecting even the slightest displacements of the
electrode.
IV. M ULTIMODAL D IAGNOSIS
By definition, the electrical modality of the proposed sensor
requires an additional sensor or electrode placed at a suitable
distance to determine electrical potential. An advantage of
mechanical sensing is that only a single sensor is required. For
instance, in the study of electrical cardiac function, at least two
electrodes must be placed on either side of the heart while a
single PPG sensor placed on e.g. the fingertip, earlobe or radial
artery site is sufficient. In applications within constrained
spaces, e.g. inside the ear [18], [19], the mechanical modality
of the sensor can be used independently to provide mechanical
measurements, without the need for a reference sensor. On the
other hand in instances where both modalities are accessible,

New diagnostic insights can be gained by combining the
recordings of electrical and mechanical attributes of cardiac function. At present, mechanical arterial/vein pulsations
induced by cardiac activity are measured using PPG sensors
based on modulations in skin-absorbed light. Pulse arrival
time (PAT) – the lag between the R-peak in ECG and the
systolic peak in PPG – can be used to assess the blood pressure
variability [20], which in turn is related to the general health of
the cardiovascular system. Also, the distance between adjacent
PPG peaks is a good proxy for heart rate variability [21], and
has direct usage in the diagnosis of stress, fatigue and other
aspects of the autonomic cardiac function.
Most PPG sensors have relatively high power consumption,
due to the high current drive demands of the light sources,
making them unsuitable for wearable devices for continuous
long-term recordings. A number of research groups working
on bodily acoustic measurements have observed local pulsations with the aid of less power hungry microphones [22].
Nomura et al. [23] have investigated the pulsation waveforms
at the radial artery site and have shown that a particular MEMS
ECM supplemented with a cylindrical O-ring can sense the
first derivative of the PPG signal.
We have found that the microphone embedded in the
multimodal sensor readily detects local pulsations when placed
on the wrist, neck, forehead, inside and behind the ear. This
capability is enabled by the flexibility of the conductive
material of the electrode and the insulating layer sealing the
microphone, allowing pressure waves to travel from the blood
vessels through the skin and the electrode into the microphone.
Both the ECG and the MPG can be sensed from exactly the
same location with the proposed sensor. Figure 9 shows both
signals (electrical and mechanical) obtained from the radial
artery site on the left wrist with the multimodal sensor where
the electrical output is referenced to a standard electrode on
the right wrist.1
B. Breathing
Breathing modulates the intensity (amplitudes) of both the
electrical [24] and mechanical modalities of cardiac function [25]. During the inspiration phase the pressure inside the
intrapleural cavity within which the heart resides, decreases,
causing the right atrium to swell, increasing the stroke volume.
The opposite phenomenon is observed during expiration, so
the overall effect of the breathing is akin to a low frequency
pump. Figure 10 illustrates that the amplitude-modulation
phenomenon caused by respiration is observable within both
the mechanical and the electrical outputs of the proposed
sensor where, for reference, respiration effort estimated from
a respiration belt is also plotted.
1 Electrical measurements require an additional reference electrode
(or reference multimodal sensor) placed some distance away from the sensor.

GOVERDOVSKY et al.: CO-LOCATED MULTIMODAL SENSING: A NEXT GENERATION SOLUTION FOR WEARABLE HEALTH

Fig. 9. HRV can be derived from the mechanical output of the sensor
(single location), while PAT can be obtained by combining information from
both modalities (requires another reference sensor/electrode). Both signals
are obtained from a single multimodal sensor placed at the radial artery
site.

143

Fig. 11. The peak-to-peak interval (PPI) signals obtained from the mechanical
and electrical outputs of the multimodal sensor when placed at the radial artery
site on the left wrist. Observe that the PPI variations for each modality closely
follow the true breathing waveform obtained from a respiration belt.

available the sensor provides twice the number of samples
provided by conventional single-modality approaches, hence
enhancing the accuracy of the estimated RSA.
V. C ONCLUSION

Fig. 10. The mechanical and electrical outputs of the multimodal sensor when
placed at the radial artery site on the left wrist. The envelopes (amplitudes)
of both signals closely follow the true breathing waveform obtained from a
respiration belt.

In addition to amplitude, respiration also influences rate
of the cardiac function; this is known as respiratory sinus
arrhythmia (RSA). During the inspiration stage the heart
rate increases, and decreases during expiration. By matching
ventilation and perfusion, RSA benefits the efficiency of the
gas exchange in the lungs [26]. Furthermore RSA magnitude
has a number of clinical uses, primarily as a measure of cardiac
vagal activity. It has been shown that autonomic dysregulation,
in the form of reduced RSA, is associated with a variety of
cardiovascular risk factors and, in particular, it is a significant
predictor of hypertension, which in turn has a significant
positive association with cardiac disease [27].
The peak-to-peak interval was calculated from both the
mechanical (MPG) and electrical (ECG) modalities. Figure 11
shows the variations of each PPI in a fashion that is
proportional to respiration effort estimated from a respiration
belt. Figures 10 and 11 illustrate the modulation of amplitude
and PPI information from both the mechanical and electrical
modalities by respiration effort. When both modalities are

A novel multimodal physiological sensor has been developed for high efficiency electromechanical sensing. It consists of a mechanically flexible electrode placed on top of
an electret condenser microphone. The construction of the
sensor is such that the local mechanical disturbances below
the sensor can be measured directly through the electrode
surface with high accuracy and sensitivity. Owing to the
co-location property of the sensor, the mechanical component
is capable of detecting motion-induced artefacts and its output
can be subsequently used to denoise the electrical component.
This has been demonstrated experimentally, whereby motion
artefact removal was performed for EEG recordings obtained
by the sensor. The results have indicated that the proposed
sensor promises improved recording quality of electrophysiological signals in wearable health applications. We have also
demonstrated that the proposed device can be used to measure
a range of biosignals, highlighting its appeal in multimodal
diagnosis. For example, readings over the radial artery site
enable simultaneous plethysmography and ECG acquisition.
This allows for the derivation of additional parameters, such as
PAT and HRV. Furthermore, the multimodal cardiac signatures
can be combined to enhance measurement accuracy in the
estimation of RSA.
R EFERENCES
[1] H. de Talhouet and J. G. Webster, “The origin of skin-stretch-caused
motion artifacts under electrodes,” Physiol. Meas., vol. 17, no. 2,
pp. 81–93, May 1996.
[2] P. S. Hamilton, M. G. Curley, R. M. Aimi, and E. P. Limited, “Comparison of methods for adaptive removal of motion artifact,” Comput.
Cardiol., 2000, pp. 383–386.
[3] I. Daly, M. Billinger, R. Scherer, and G. Muller-Putz, “On the automated removal of artifacts related to head movement from the EEG,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 427–434,
May 2013.

144

[4] P. S. Hamilton and M. G. Curley, “Adaptive removal of motion artifact,”
in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (EMBC), vol. 1.
Oct./Nov. 1997, pp. 297–299.
[5] P. H. Devlin, R. G. Mark, and J. Ketchum, “Detecting electrode motion
noise in ECG signals by monitoring electrode impedance,” in Proc.
Comput. Cardiol., 1984, pp. 51–56.
[6] S. Kim, R. F. Yazicioglu, T. Torfs, B. Dilpreet, P. Julien, and
C. Van Hoof, “A 2.4 µA continuous-time electrode-skin impedance
measurement circuit for motion artifact monitoring in ECG acquisition
systems,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits (VLSIC), vol. 4. Jun. 2010,
pp. 219–220.
[7] D. A. Tong, K. A. Bartels, and K. S. Honeyager, “Adaptive reduction of
motion artifact in the electrocardiogram,” in Proc. Ann. Biomed. Eng.
Soc. EMBS/BMES Conf., vol. 2. 2002, pp. 1403–1404.
[8] P. T. Gibbs, L. B. Wood, and H. H. Asada, “Active motion artifact cancellation for wearable health monitoring sensors using collocated MEMS accelerometers,” in Proc. SPIE, vol. 5765. 2005,
pp. 811–819.
[9] X. Pengjun, T. Xiaoming, and W. Shanyuan, “Measurement of wearable
electrode and skin mechanical interaction using displacement and pressure sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng. Informat. (BMEI), Oct.
2011, pp. 1131–1134.
[10] J. Ottenbacher, M. Kirst, L. Jatobá, M. Huflejt, U. Grossmann, and
W. Stork, “Reliable motion artifact detection for ECG monitoring
systems with dry electrodes,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. (EMBS), Aug. 2008, pp. 1695–1698.
[11] B.-H. Ko, T. Lee, C. Choi, and Y.-H. Kim, “Motion artifact reduction in electrocardiogram using adaptive filtering based on half cell
potential monitoring,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol.
Soc. (EMBC), Aug./Sep. 2012, pp. 1590–1593.
[12] A. J. Casson, D. Yates, S. Smith, J. S. Duncan, and
E. Rodríguez-Villegas, “Wearable electroencephalography,” IEEE
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 44–56, May/Jun. 2010.
[13] R. Edelberg, “Local electrical response of the skin to deformation,”
J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 334–40, Mar. 1973.
[14] H. W. Tam and J. G. Webster, “Minimizing electrode motion artifact by skin abrasion,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 134–139, Mar. 1977.
[15] R. N. Vigário, “Extraction of ocular artefacts from EEG using independent component analysis,” Electroencephalograph. Clin. Neurophysiol.,
vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 395–404, Sep. 1997.
[16] N. Mammone, F. La Foresta, and F. C. Morabito, “Automatic artifact
rejection from multichannel scalp EEG by wavelet ICA,” IEEE Sensors
J., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 533–542, Mar. 2012.
[17] D. Looney, V. Goverdovsky, P. Kidmose, and D. P. Mandic, “Subspace
denoising of EEG artefacts via multivariate EMD,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process. (ICASSP), pp. 4688–4692, May
2014.
[18] D. Looney et al., “The in-the-ear recording concept: User-centered and
wearable brain monitoring,” IEEE Pulse, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 32–42,
Nov. 2012.
[19] P. Kidmose, D. Looney, M. Ungstrup, M. Rank, and D. P. Mandic,
“A study of evoked potentials from ear-EEG,” IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2824–2830, Oct. 2013.
[20] E. Pinheiro, O. Postolache, and P. Girão, “Pulse arrival time and
ballistocardiogram application to blood pressure variability estimation,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Workshop Med. Meas. Appl., May 2009, pp. 132–136.
[21] A. Schäfer and J. Vagedes, “How accurate is pulse rate variability as
an estimate of heart rate variability? A review on studies comparing
photoplethysmographic technology with an electrocardiogram,” Int. J.
Cardiol., vol. 166, no. 1, pp. 15–29, Jun. 2013.
[22] P. Corbishley and E. Rodríguez-Villegas, “Breathing detection: Towards
a miniaturized, wearable, battery-operated monitoring system,” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 196–204, Jan. 2008.
[23] S. Nomura, M. Hasegawa-Ohira, Y. Hanasaka, T. Ishiguro, and
H. Ogawa, “Identification of human pulse waveform by silicon microphone chip,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst., Man, Cybern., Oct. 2011,
pp. 1145–1150.
[24] R. Giraud, N. Siegenthaler, D. R. Morel, J.-A. Romand, L. Brochard, and
K. Bendjelid, “Respiratory change in ECG-wave amplitude is a reliable
parameter to estimate intravascular volume status,” J. Clin. Monitor.
Comput., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 107–111, Apr. 2013.
[25] K. H. Shelley, D. H. Jablonka, A. A. Awad, R. G. Stout, H. Rezkanna,
and D. G. Silverman, “What is the best site for measuring the effect
of ventilation on the pulse oximeter waveform?” Anesthesia Analgesia,
vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 372–377, Aug. 2006.

IEEE SENSORS JOURNAL, VOL. 15, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

[26] F. Yasuma and J. Hayano, “Respiratory sinus arrhythmia: Why does
the heartbeat synchronize with respiratory rhythm?” Chest J., vol. 125,
no. 2, pp. 683–690, Feb. 2004.
[27] C. M. Masi, L. C. Hawkley, E. M. Rickett, and J. T. Cacioppo,
“Respiratory sinus arrhythmia and diseases of aging: Obesity, diabetes
mellitus, and hypertension,” Biol. Psychol., vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 212–223,
Feb. 2007.

Valentin Goverdovsky received the M.Eng. degree
in electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree
in communications from Imperial College London,
London, U.K, where he is currently a Rosetrees Fellow with the Department of Electrical and Electronic
Engineering. His research interests are primarily
in the areas of biomedical instrumentation, analog
integrated circuits, radio frequency communications,
and he received the Eric Laithwaithe Award for
excellence in research. His current work concentrates on the development of wearable biosensing
platforms, such as the novel in-the-ear sensing concept for 24/7 monitoring
of brain and body functions in the context of traumatic brain injury.

David Looney (M’08) received the B.Eng. degree
in electronic engineering from University College
Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, and the Ph.D. degree in
signal processing from Imperial College London,
London, U.K., in 2011.
He is currently a Research Associate with the
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, Imperial College London. His research interests
are in the areas of data fusion, time-frequency analysis, linear algebra, complexity analysis, and wearable
solutions for health monitoring.

Preben Kidmose (SM’12) received the B.Sc. degree
in electrical engineering from the University of
Southern Denmark (Engineering College), Odense,
Denmark, in 1995, and the M.Sc. degree in engineering and the Ph.D. degree in signal processing
from the Technical University of Denmark, in 1998
and 2001, respectively. From 2001 to 2011, he was
with Widex A/S, Denmark, as a R&D Engineer in
hearing aids and medical devices. He is currently
a Professor with the Department of Engineering,
Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. His areas of
interest include signal processing and machine learning in medical devices
and for audio processing, medical instrumentation and sensors, and system
engineering/design of medical devices.

GOVERDOVSKY et al.: CO-LOCATED MULTIMODAL SENSING: A NEXT GENERATION SOLUTION FOR WEARABLE HEALTH

Christos Papavassiliou (M’96–SM’05) was born
in Athens, Greece, in 1960. He received the B.Sc.
degree in physics from the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, and the Ph.D.
degree in applied physics from Yale University, New
Haven, CT, USA.
He has been involved in monolithic microwave
integrated circuit (MMIC) design and measurements
with Foundation for Research and Technology, Hellas, Crete, Greece, and has been involved in several
European and regional projects on GaAs MMIC
technology. In 1996, he joined Imperial College London, London, U.K., where
he is currently a Senior Lecturer. He has contributed to 40 publications.
His current research interests include SiGe technology development, and
instrumentation and substrate noise coupling in mixed-mode integrated-circuit
design.

145

Danilo P. Mandic is a Professor of Signal Processing with Imperial College London, London, U.K.,
where he has been working in the area of nonlinear
adaptive signal processing and nonlinear dynamics.
He has been a Guest Professor with Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, and a Frontier
Researcher with RIKEN, Tokyo, Japan. His publication record includes two research monographs titled
Recurrent Neural Networks for Prediction (West
Sussex, U.K.: Wiley, August 2001) and ComplexValued Nonlinear Adaptive Filters: Noncircularity,
Widely Linear and Neural Models (West Sussex, U.K.: Wiley, April 2009),
an edited book titled Signal Processing for Information Fusion (New York,
NY, USA: Springer, 2008), and more than 200 publications on signal and
image processing.
He has been a member of the IEEE Technical Committees on Signal
Processing Theory and Methods and Machine Learning for Signal Processing, an Associate Editor of the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON C IRCUITS AND
S YSTEMS II, the IEEE T RANSACTIONS ON S IGNAL P ROCESSING, the IEEE
T RANSACTIONS ON N EURAL N ETWORKS , and the IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine. He has produced award winning papers and products from his
collaboration with the industry, and has received the President’s Award for
excellence in post-graduate supervision at Imperial College. He is a member
of the London Mathematical Society.

