University of Birmingham

VOG-enhanced ICA for removing blink and eyemovement artefacts from EEG
Samadi, Mohammad Reza Haji; Zakeri, Zohreh; Cooke, Neil
DOI:
10.1109/BHI.2016.7455970

Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Citation for published version (Harvard):
Samadi, MRH, Zakeri, Z & Cooke, N 2016, VOG-enhanced ICA for removing blink and eye-movement artefacts
from EEG. in 3rd IEEE EMBS International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics, BHI 2016.,
7455970, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), pp. 603-606, 3rd IEEE EMBS International
Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics, BHI 2016, Las Vegas, United States, 24/02/16.
https://doi.org/10.1109/BHI.2016.7455970

Link to publication on Research at Birmingham portal

Publisher Rights Statement:
Checked for eligibility: 06/12/2016

General rights
Unless a licence is specified above, all rights (including copyright and moral rights) in this document are retained by the authors and/or the
copyright holders. The express permission of the copyright holder must be obtained for any use of this material other than for purposes
permitted by law.
•Users may freely distribute the URL that is used to identify this publication.
•Users may download and/or print one copy of the publication from the University of Birmingham research portal for the purpose of private
study or non-commercial research.
•User may use extracts from the document in line with the concept of ‘fair dealing’ under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 (?)
•Users may not further distribute the material nor use it for the purposes of commercial gain.
Where a licence is displayed above, please note the terms and conditions of the licence govern your use of this document.
When citing, please reference the published version.
Take down policy
While the University of Birmingham exercises care and attention in making items available there are rare occasions when an item has been
uploaded in error or has been deemed to be commercially or otherwise sensitive.
If you believe that this is the case for this document, please contact UBIRA@lists.bham.ac.uk providing details and we will remove access to
the work immediately and investigate.

Download date: 05. Mar. 2020

VOG-ENHANCED ICA FOR REMOVING BLINK AND
EYE-MOVEMENT ARTEFACTS FROM EEG
Mohammad Reza Haji Samadi, Zohreh Zakeri and Neil Cooke
Abstract— The steady-state visual evoked potential (SSVEP)
is reliable for many paradigms such as clinical neuroscience and
brain computer interfaces (BCI), providing high information
throughput with minimal between-person variations. However,
Electrooculogram (EOG) artefacts in Electroencephalography
(EEG) signal limit applications with dynamic SSVEP stimuli
due to eye movement and blinks. Independent Component Analysis (ICA) is a successful method for removing EOG artefacts.
We propose ‘Blink VOG-ICA’ (BVOG-ICA) - an enhanced ICA
algorithm that uses eye tracker video-oculography (VOG) eye
movement and blink detection information. It demonstrates
improved performance compared to ICA variants Plöchl and
our previous VOG-ICA when evaluated on matched VOG and
EEG data. SSVEP classification accuracy for the post-ICA
clean EEG consequently improves 7% and 4% for static and
dynamic SSVEP stimuli respectively, suggesting BVOG-ICA as
a potentially reliable automatic EOG artefact removal method
for SSVEP paradigms.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Electroencephalography (EEG) is the recording of electrical activity of brain over the scalp using a set of
electrodes [1]. The Steady-State Visual Evoked Potential
(SSVEP) is the electrical response of the brain which is
synchronised in the frequency and phase to a flickering
visual stimuli at a frequency greater than 6Hz [2]. SSVEP
is a popular technique for many paradigms in cognitive and
clinical neuroscience [3], [4], [5] as well as Brain-Computer
Interface [6], [7], because it requires less user training and
provides minimal between-person variation. EEG signals are
usually contaminated by artefacts which may hinder correct
interpretation of EEG. Electrooculogram (EOG) artefacts artefacts arising from eye movements and blinking - are
particularly prevalent.
The blind source separation method Independent Component Analysis (ICA) has been successfully applied on
EEG data to remove artefacts and avoid unnecessary intervention [8]. ICA assumes the observed EEG signal is a
linear combination of several independent (artefact and nonartefact) sources and attempts to estimate the sources. The
main limitation of ICA is its inability to label the estimated
sources. Consequently, automatic labelling of artefactual
sources then removing them from the EEG signal before its
reconstruction is an active topic of research [9], [10], [11],
[12].
In this work we combine the problem of reliably detecting
SSVEP for dynamic stimuli with that of removing EOG
Mohammad Reza Haji Samadi, Zohreh Zakeri and Neil Cooke are with
the School of Electronic, Electrical and System Engineering, The University
of Birmingham, B15 2TT, Birmingham, U.K. (e-mail: mrh833@bham.ac.uk;
zxz849@bham.ac.uk; n.j.cooke@bham.ac.uk).

artefacts. Eye blink is inevitable in EEG recordings and
dynamic stimuli elicits eye movement artefacts - specifically
pursuit eye movement - which can degrade SSVEP detection
accuracy further. In section 2 we review previous studies
for EOG artefacts removal. Section 3 includes our proposed
method to use optical information (VOG) for EOG artefact
detection and SSVEP detection. In section 4 we describe the
evaluation method and the experimental paradigm. Results
are reported in section 4 following by a discussion in section
5.
II. R ELATED W ORK
Several studies attempt to identify artefactual sources
(including eye-related artefacts) by exploiting the spatial,
temporal and frequential characteristics of artefacts. In recent
years, use of optical information to remove eye-related
artefacts from EEG gained interest. Plöchl et. al. [10]
and our previous work VOG-ICA [11] use matched Videooculography (VOG) and EEG data to detect eye movement artefacts when rapid (saccade) and smooth pursuit eye
movements occurred, respectively. Neither of these methods
explicitly consider sources associated to eye blinks. In this
work we propose ‘Blink VOG-ICA’ (BVOG-ICA), a fully
automated method to label eye-related artefacts corresponding to blink, pursuit and rapid eye movements.
III. A PPROACH
A. Optical Information
VOG data gives the time-variant signals x(t) and y(t)
representing the horizontal and vertical gaze position at time
t, respectively. In VOG recordings, there are times when
eye-tracker does not detect the pupil due to occlusion i.e.
blinking. This results in gaps of several hundred milliseconds
in x(t) and y(t). From these gaps we derive a boolean valued
blink trigger signal b(t) representing blink occurrence at time
t. The gaps in the x(t) and y(t) signals are filled by linear
interpolation between the first values before and after the
gap.
B. BVOG-ICA for EOG artefact removal
To separate eye-related sources from EEG recordings,
we apply the Extended-Infomax [13] ICA algorithm. The
cross-correlation [14] of the first order derivative of the
ith Independent Component (IC), Si , with the first order
derivative of x(t), y(t) and b(t) is calculated. ICs are scored
according to the maximum absolute values of their crosscorrelation with b(t):
dSi db
γb,i = max(|(
∗ )(t)|)
(1)
dt
dt

where γb,i refers to the maximum absolute values of crossi
correlation between the first order derivative of ith IC, dS
dt ,
db
and the first order derivative of the blink signal dt . The ZScores of the ICs in the scoring γb,i is calculated:
Zγb,i =

γb,i − E[γb,i ]
σ(γb,i )

(2)

where E[...] and σ(...) refer to the expected value and
standard deviation of the γb,i , respectively. ICs with Z-scores
above the threshold, Zγb,i = 2.0, are highly correlated with
eye blinks and are detected as blink artefacts. The same procedure is applied for obtaining ICs which are associated with
horizontal and vertical eye movement sequences, x(t) and
y(t), respectively following our VOG-ICA algorithm [11].
All detected artefacts are removed and artefact-free EEG data
is reconstructed from the remaining ICs.

56◦ × 40◦ visual angel). The VOG is up-sampled to 128Hz
with linear interpolation in order to match the EEG sample
rate. Timestamps displayed on the LCD and recorded by the
eye-tracker’s scene camera are used to synchronise the EEG
and VOG recordings. Further details of the data captured
can be found in our paper detailing the VOG-ICA algorithm
[11].
B. SSVEP response detection tests
The SSVEP detection accuracy before and after removing
EOG artefacts is compared. If the EOG artefacts are labelled
and removed correctly, an increase in the accuracy of SSVEP
detection is expected. Results are compared with the stateof-art VOG-based EOG artefact removal methods proposed
by [10] (named Plöchl) and our VOG-ICA method [11].
V. R ESULTS

C. SSVEP response detection

A. BVOG-ICA for EOG artefact removal

To detect SSVEP frequencies, the EEG signal recorded
at each electrode is split into 2000ms windows with 60%
overlaps. The power spectral density (PSD) of each window
is estimated using Welch’s method [15]. The amplitude of the
stimulation frequencies (7Hz, 10Hz and 12Hz) and their
second harmonics (i.e. 14Hz, 20Hz and 24Hz) obtained
from PSD are extracted as features. A k-Nearest Neighbour
(kNN) classifier (k = 1) with Euclidean distance metric
distinguishes different SSVEP stimulation frequencies. The
classifier performance is evaluated by 10-fold cross validation.

Fig. 1 illustrates the VOG gap interpolation procedure
described in section III-A. Additionally, Fig. 1.b depicts
the blink signal b(t), derived from the missing samples in
VOG data. The gap filling method avoids the occurrence of
false saccadic (rapid) eye movement by providing a smooth
transition between the last data sample before start of a gap
and the first data sample after the end of that gap.
Fig. 2 shows the distribution of the blink, horizontal and
vertical eye movement Z-Scores of ICs of all subjects in
Static SSVEP (Fig. 2.a) and Dynamic SSVEP (Fig. 2.b). The
ICs with Z-Scores higher than 2.0 are considered as EOG
artefacts. This value is determined empirically. Fig. 3 shows
a typical sample of the blink and saccade ICs derected using
the proposed method. During Dynamic SSVEP the BVOGICA ICs considered as EOG artefacts are better separated
from the mean distribution of all other ICs compared to the
Static SSVEP where subjects make minimal eye movements.
This suggests that BVOG-ICA performs a better EOG source
separation because there are more eye movement signals to
convey EOG information.
Considering both Static and Dynamic SSVEP, there are
8 ICs detected as blink, 8 ICs detected as horizontal eye
movement and 8 ICs detected as vertical eye movement
artefacts. The 8 ICs detected as horizontal eye movements
are the same ICs detected as vertical eye movements. This
suggests that both types of eye movements are in the same
ICs. Additionally, there are three ICs mutually detected as
blink and eye movement artefacts. In total, BVOG-ICA
detects 13 unique ICs as EOG artefacts.

IV. E VALUATION
A. Method and Apparatus
Five healthy subjects having normal or corrected-tonormal vision participated in the experiment. A 19 inch
liquid crystal display (LCD) with 60Hz vertical refresh rate
is used as the SSVEP stimulator and subjects are seated
at a distance of about 100cm from it. All participants are
instructed to relax and avoid moving their body to prevent
the contamination of EEG signals with muscle artefacts.
Each subject conducts two tasks, Fixed SSVEP and Dynamic
SSVEP, each approximately 9 minutes duration. Trials start
with the presentation of a fixation cross in the centre of the
screen. After 5 seconds a 10x10 checkerboard, flickering in
7Hz, 10Hz or 12Hz, overlays the fixation cross for another
14 seconds.
In Static SSVEP the checkerboard is remained fixed in the
centre of the screen. In Dynamic SSVEP the checkerboard
moves from centre towards different locations on the screen.
Each task consist of 8 trials for each frequency.
Two consumer-grade recording apparatus capture EEG and
VOG. The EEG signal is recorded using a 14 electrodes
wireless EEG headset (Emotiv EPOC), sampling at 128Hz.
The slow drifts and high-frequency noises are removed
from EEG recordings by band-pass filtering (1 40Hz). VOG
is captured using a head-mounted monocular eye-tracker
(Tobii Glasses), sampling at 30Hz, which enables recording
a subjects focus of gaze within his field of view (with

B. SSVEP detection
Table I summarises the SSVEP detection accuracy. It is
highest for BVOG-ICA in both tasks (i.e Static SSVEP
and Dynamic SSVEP). The SSVEP classification accuracy
increases by 7% in Static SSVEP, and by 4% in Dynamic SSVEP. There is also an increase in the average
SSVEP classification accuracy when our previous VOGICA method [11] is applied - a 4% increase in Static
SSVEP and a 3% increase in Dynamic SSVEP. However,

Fig. 1. Sample processed VOG data where missing values in (a) are substituted using linear interpolation; (b) shows the interpolated VOG data and the
blink component derived from the missing values.

Fig. 3. Typical scalp topography maps representing distribution of the
a)saccade and b) blink artefact sources.

when comparing the SSVEP classification accuracy of the
subjects individually for VOG-ICA, there are some cases
where SSVEP classification accuracy decreases. The lowest
averaged SSVEP classification accuracy is obtained using
Plöchl, falling below raw data by approximately 6%. This
could be due to false detection of ICs as EOG sources which
contain SSVEP information.
Fig. 2. Distribution of the Z-Score values obtained by cross-correlation of
each single IC with b(t), x(t) and y(t). Scores belong to all subjects in a)
the Static SSVEP and b) the Dynamic SSVEP task. Red lines indicate the
selected threshold (Zγb,i ,Zγx,i or Zγy,i = 2.0).

Overall, SSVEP classification accuracy increases when
VOG-ICA and BVOG-ICA are applied. However, BVOGICA achieved better results because VOG-ICA does not
remove the artefacts arising from eye blinks. Additionally,
between all three EOG artefact removal methods BVOG-ICA
achieved less between-person variations (last row of Table I).

TABLE I
P ERFORMANCE OF SSVEP CLASSIFICATION FOR EACH SUBJECT IN Static SSVEP AND Dynamic SSVEP; WHEN THERE IS NO EOG ARTEFACT
REMOVAL

(O RIG ) COMPARED TO WHEN P L ÖCHL , VOG-ICA AND BVOG-ICA ARE APPLIED FOR EOG ARTEFACT REMOVAL . T HE BEST OBTAINED
RESULT IS HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD .
Static SSVEP

Subjects

∗

Dynamic SSVEP

Orig(%)

Plöchl(%)

VOG(%)

BVOG (%)

Orig (%)

Plöchl (%)

S01
S02
S03
S04
S05

82.98
88.99
80.38
85.27
81.76

68.36
89.24
76.1
72.99

81.6
94.02
90.65
82.00
90.55

82.98
94.02
93.02
94.01
90.56

VOG(%)

BVOG(%)

89.14
88.65
89.8
83.85
81.54

64.55
83.79
83.29

93.47
91.24
85.86
95.01
80.12

93.98
92.34
85.86
96.00
81.88

Ave
std

83.88
3.37

77.69 ∗
8.08

87.76
5.62

90.91
4.65

86.60
3.68

80.46 ∗
9.33

89.14
6.11

90.01
5.92

In the cases where there is no IC detected as artefact (“—”), the original accuracy is considered in calculation of the averaged accuracy.

VI. D ISCUSSION
In this work, we propose ‘Blink VOG-ICA’ (BVOGICA), a VOG-based automatic method for the detection and
removal of EOG artefacts from EEG. We detect eye blinks
in the VOG and use this information in addition to VOG
eye movement information to improve SSVEP classification
accuracy. BVOG-ICA outperforms [10] and our previous
method [11] which does not consider explicit blink detection from the VOG signal. Although we claim favourable
performance compared to Plöchl et. al, our evaluation was
conducted using consumer grade EEG and VOG equipment
designed for Human-Computer Interaction where SSVEP
paradigms have greatest potential. This equipment typically
has fewer channels, lower signal to noise ratio and lower
sampling rates compared to laboratory grade apparatus. Future studies considering clinical EEG with larger sample sets
to evaluate BVOG-ICA would be beneficial, as would the
performance of artefact rejection algorithms against a wide
range of grades of apparatus to demonstrate field potential.
R EFERENCES
[1] S. Sanei and J. A. Chambers, EEG signal processing. Wiley. com,
2008.
[2] M. Middendorf, G. McMillan, G. Calhoun, and K. S. Jones, “Braincomputer interfaces based on the steady-state visual-evoked response,”
Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
211–214, 2000.
[3] F.-B. Vialatte, M. Maurice, J. Dauwels, and A. Cichocki, “Steady-state
visually evoked potentials: focus on essential paradigms and future
perspectives,” Progress in neurobiology, vol. 90, no. 4, pp. 418–438,
2010.
[4] F. Gembler, P. Stawicki, and I. Volosyak, “A comparison of ssvepbased bci-performance between different age groups,” in Advances in
Computational Intelligence. Springer, 2015, pp. 71–77.
[5] H.-T. Hsu, I.-H. Lee, H.-T. Tsai, H.-C. Chang, K.-K. Shyu, C.-C. Hsu,
H.-H. Chang, T.-K. Yeh, C.-Y. Chang, and P.-L. Lee, “Evaluate the
feasibility of using frontal ssvep to implement an ssvep-based bci in
young, elderly and als groups,” 2015.
[6] B. Z. Allison, D. J. McFarland, G. Schalk, S. D. Zheng, M. M. Jackson,
and J. R. Wolpaw, “Towards an independent brain–computer interface
using steady state visual evoked potentials,” Clinical neurophysiology,
vol. 119, no. 2, pp. 399–408, 2008.
[7] M. R. H. Samadi and N. Cooke, “Eeg signal processing for eye tracking,” in Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2013 Proceedings
of the 22nd European, Sept 2014, pp. 2030–2034.
[8] R. N. Vigário, “Extraction of ocular artefacts from eeg using independent component analysis,” Electroencephalography and clinical
neurophysiology, vol. 103, no. 3, pp. 395–404, 1997.

[9] A. Mognon, J. Jovicich, L. Bruzzone, and M. Buiatti, “Adjust: An
automatic eeg artifact detector based on the joint use of spatial and
temporal features,” Psychophysiology, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 229–240,
2011.
[10] M. Plöchl, J. P. Ossandón, and P. König, “Combining eeg and eye
tracking: identification, characterization, and correction of eye movement artifacts in electroencephalographic data,” Frontiers in human
neuroscience, vol. 6, 2012.
[11] M. R. H. Samadi and N. Cooke, “Vog-enhanced ica for ssvep response
detection from consumer-grade eeg,” in Signal Processing Conference
(EUSIPCO), 2013 Proceedings of the 22nd European, Sept 2014, pp.
2025–2029.
[12] M. R. Haji Samadi and N. Cooke, “A novel approach for adaptive
eeg artefact rejection and eog gaze estimation,” in HCI International
2013-Posters Extended Abstracts. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013,
pp. 603–607.
[13] A. J. Bell and T. J. Sejnowski, “An information-maximization approach
to blind separation and blind deconvolution,” Neural computation,
vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1129–1159, 1995.
[14] S. J. Orfanidis, “Optimum signal processing: an introduction,” 1985.
[15] P. Welch, “The use of fast fourier transform for the estimation of
power spectra: a method based on time averaging over short, modified
periodograms,” Audio and Electroacoustics, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 70–73, 1967.

