Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly
at Home
Emmanouela Vogiatzaki1
1

and Artur Krukowski2(&)

Research for Science, Art and Technology (RFSAT) Ltd., Shefﬁeld, UK
2
Intracom S. A. Telecom Solutions, Athens, Greece
krukowa@intracom-telecom.com

Abstract. We describe herein the problem of providing the most cost efﬁcient
and effective ways of supporting mental wellbeing as well as methods for
physical and mental rehabilitation for elderly at home including a recovery from
accidents, particularly concentrating on those impacting brain activities, such as
aging-related dementia and stroke, illnesses with very high socio-economic
influence. Technologies built in several EU funded projects, e.g. FP7-ICTStrokeBack, FP7-ICT-ARMOR, Artemis-CHIRON, FP7-SEC-AF3 and other
ones, are suitable also for other kinds of health issues, such as recovery from
injuries, restoring mobility etc. A common part is stimulating engagement
through entertainment, rivalry and “real feeling” of gaming environment,
motivating compliance with rehabilitation rules. The automated home system
combining progress in ICT and applied clinical know-how allows patients, their
direct care providers and family to back the effective use of rehabilitation procedures in their familiar home surroundings instead of unfriendly clinical settings. Our system integrates a set of state of art technologies ranging from
augmented/virtual reality gaming, merged with immersive user interfaces for
providing mixed reality exercise setting, innovative embedded micro sensor
devices with improved power autonomy through use of the newest Bluetooth
Smart communication transceivers, combined together into a Personal Health
Record (PHR) system supporting the delivery of individual, patient-centred ehealth services both at home, at hospital or when mobile. The use of mixedreality systems, merging interactive virtual components with realistic settings of
patient’s home, is linked with multi-modal user interfaces stimulating operation
of his/her body to accomplish the objective of the exercise, while selfmotivation is inspired by rivalry with oneself and other people. This gears to
achieving better individual’s contribution to rehabilitation procedure, leading to
attaining meaningfully quicker regaining of one’s earlier abilities. The physiological data is combined with and related to the detected body motion sensing
using novel feature extraction and classiﬁcation procedures handled within a
wearable unit, to determine the precision of performed workouts. By using
physical intervention only when essential, this disregards expensive human
involvement and thus signiﬁcantly decreases related expenses of Public Health
Care services.
We start with describing the motivation and needs for such system in Sect. 2,
which gives raise to deriving system speciﬁcations and architecture as described
in Sect. 3. In following Sects. 4 and 5 we described speciﬁc technologies
developed in our projects, namely Mixed-Reality Rehabilitation Training
© The Author(s) 2019
I. Ganchev et al. (Eds.): Enhanced Living Environments, LNCS 11369, pp. 177–209, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-10752-9_8

178

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski
System integrated into a Personal Health Record (PHR) platform. We then
provide the overview of the overall system integrated into a portable unit in
Sect. 6, concluding with report on evaluations with users in Sect. 7.

1 Motivation and Objectives
The Public Health Care devotes more than 3% of their whole healthcare spending for
dealing with effects of brain associated diseases among diverse countries in Europe and
USA. The usual retirement age and life expectation has increased over recent years,
whereas risk of evolving mental issues have raised to almost 40–50% of population in
and over the retiring age. Investigations show that expenses of long-term care have
raised from 13% to 49% of average global expenses over recent years. Hence, creating
an effective policy for sustaining mental wellbeing, providing continuing care and
rehabilitation approach for people at risk, actively engaging patients in this process, at
the same time lowering expensive human involvement turn out to be a matter of
urgency.
The pervasiveness of getting old in the European civilizations is projected to lead to
enlarged population suffering from mental illnesses, where peak risk of dementia may
reach almost 40% of the retired population and a raising risk of strokes for elderly. For
instance, [2] forecasts that the total stroke patients in Hessen (Germany); may rise from
20,846 in 2005 to over 35,000 in 2050 that equals a surge of near 70% during the next
four decades. The German Aerztezeitung forecasts a growth of more than 2.5 times,
meaning a vast burden on expenditure of healthcare organisations. The consequence on
healthcare could be even more important as the present tendency shows a ratio of
young and healthy peoples to elderly folks also lowers, such that the casual care price
could be reducing and thus directly pointing to raised direct healthcare expenses. This
could become a weight for economies.
Consequently, there is a serious need for improving medical care, speciﬁcally at
home, engaging elderly into their care process for accomplishing best result in terms of
both medical care and quality of life. Furthermore, the results of individual strokes have
signiﬁcant effect on our society too. The entire expense of stroke care within EU has
been estimated over 38 billion euros in 2006. This amount involved healthcare
expenses (about 49% of entire cost), production loss due to incapacity and deaths (23%
whole cost) and casual care charges (29% of whole cost).
Our work targets both of the mentioned difﬁculties. The target was to develop a
telemedicine system that would provide medical recuperation at home for elderly with
negligible human involvement. Using StrokeBack services, elderly could perform
therapy at their home, a place where they feel emotionally more comfortable than at
clinics. Furthermore, interactions with physiotherapists could be reduced thus reducing
costs of medical care. By helping in appropriately performing the physiotherapy with
automatic guidance enhanced by suitable medical data and overseen by professionals
only when necessary, we intended to stimulate elderly to train more and more efﬁciently than it is likely nowadays. Henceforth, we aimed to improve the speed of
rehabilitation, as well as the quality of life for the elderly, at the same time reducing
overall costs of healthcare. The system has been accompanied with a Patient Health

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

179

Record (PHR), in which exercise parameters and important patient data would be
stored. Therefore, the PHR delivers all essential medical info that rehabilitation professionals might require to assess success of the rehabilitation exercises, for example to
presume links between chosen trainings and rehabilitation results for various people.
Also, to assess a general patient wellbeing. Moreover, PHR is used to offer mid-term
feedback to patients, such as speed and effect of therapy related to usual and recent
progress, thus maintaining high motivation.
We intended to improve keeping mental ﬁtness and where mental illness develops,
speeding up a recovery in case of stroke and reducing progress of age-related mental
degradation for elderly living alone. We expected a twofold advantage from using our
system. Most people feel emotionally healthier in their familiar home setting rather
than in hospices while recovery speed is much faster. Moreover, we intended to exploit
an improved enthusiasm of elderly during training with tools resembling game consoles. An ability to perform workouts without supervision by physiotherapists beneﬁts
the reduction of medical expenses by lowering costly human interaction time.
Nowadays, amount of time needed for conducting occupational (means therapeutic)
and physiotherapeutic sessions are constrained by costs for patient’s lodging, transportation for therapists visiting patients’ homes. Our objective is to provide new
technological capabilities and service assemblies for enabling elderly to improve their
wellbeing through increase of the amount of exercises.

Fig. 1. The overall architecture of the foreseen therapy system

Over recent years game consoles attracted much attention when used for rehabilitation trainings. Articles prove achieving signiﬁcant improvement in speeding up
rehabilitation process and mostly being an incentive for patients [1, 2, 14, 26]. We
target mostly elderly people at early phases of cerebral decay, supporting them with
initial therapy whereas empowering also more affected ones to beneﬁt from using our
specialist care services too. We designed our services with clinical use in mind with

180

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

aim to be adjustable to ones’ capabilities (patient-oriented). This could be used both by
hemiplegic and paretic persons, as well as those using wheelchairs. This way we
intended to decrease the time, static therapy and treatment process, allowing elderly to
maintain conducting their normal life for as long as possible.
The concept of the described system centres on patients treated as subjects of the
recovery process (Fig. 1), based on a proven premise that elderly feel more comfortable
at home. It is known that people in general train more and better within stimulating
surroundings. A person follows more instructions from a therapist. They can exercise at
home and the system oversees their workout, providing feedback in real time if they
execute them properly or not. The system saves results and core physiological data,
which is then examined by medical professionals to evaluate ones’ progress. The
elderly may get immediate response about their individual condition. To guarantee
correct guidance, therapists also receive information from the PHR about patient
progress to be able to assess the recovery and decide if to use alternative training
exercises, being introduced to one’s training regime.
For remote therapy training at gold standard, that is as good as during face-to-face
exercise with therapists, advanced sensor body area networks (BAN) were employed.
The BAN worn by elderly supports continuous supervision of elderly’s movement and
main body measurements. The objective is to check and save patients’ condition such
that they can regularly, train autonomously without instructions from therapists. Using
appropriate sensors, we can assume to detect also undesirable extra actions. Elderly
may wear sensors during a whole day that permits professionals to relate ones’ daily
activities with accurate required patterns deﬁned by trainings. To ease system conﬁguration, we only use and assess self-learning algorithms for analysing exercises, that
is the system learns correct actions (patient movements) during training as they are
performed under supervision of the training therapist. Such algorithms are based on the
record of “correct” body motions performed by therapist during the learning process,
while correctness of performing exercises is determined by assessing a match between
the patient’s body movements and previously recorded training data.
A typical scenario is when the therapist needs to care for an elderly person once a
week just to assess the effectiveness of the therapy, to examine the outcomes of last
training using recorded info and to change the regime if required. Additionally, therapists may need to teach new movements and arrange a new training plan. This way,
we aim to improve a therapy effectiveness at home. Our objective is also to assess a
viability and needs for making use of electronic PHR for recording and documenting
one’s condition as well as to remotely follow up on the training, for example by the
visiting physician. This contains the data captured during training workouts and during
everyday activities. Such an information is kept in database and can then be examined
by medical experts. The assessment may be exploited for determining actual effects of
personal training. Such an advice may be beneﬁcial for choosing training plans for
other persons, for reviewing efﬁciency of training for given groups of people etc.
Physiological data could be helpful in assessing one’s condition and could help in
examining chances of future events.

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

181

2 Speciﬁcations and Architecture
Many articles have been published from user point of view about home-based rehabilitation systems. When building such a system for elderly suffering from age-caused
cerebral problems, it is important to consider how to promote them to such target
audience, developing and evaluating home training platforms, form of user interface,
types of wearable sensors and a feasibility of the home-based therapy technologies.
User needs and requirements, sensor accessories and usability constraints have been
identiﬁed through interviews with target user groups including a total of 16 physiotherapists, 39 patients and 13 care takers. Consultations have been done with new
volunteers and some experienced ones, who were already familiar with the system and
could suggest new features. The ﬁrst system prototype was evaluated with 5 therapists
and 4 patients who had used the system over the period of two-weeks. Clinical
requirements were assessed based on responses to a postal investigation from 28
therapists. The subsequent version has been evaluated on 8 patients. The result of this
investigation was that home-based therapy needs to:
•
•
•
•
•

Supplement a therapy – patients did not like it as alternative type of therapy
not to be focussed on one “type of rehabilitation”
be adaptable to personal needs as no two people are the same
be simple and small to use, flexible to ﬁt personal requirements of one’s home
anticipate problems with memory, awareness, language, understanding info and
losses of attention linked with old-age dementia
• provide response on outcome of therapy, even if progress may be slow

The developed system comprises two components:
1. “Expert clinical system” installed at the clinic, although it might be portable as
well. This might require technicians with expert clinical knowledge to set it up to ﬁt
the needs of a particular patient.
2. “Home system” signiﬁcantly less complex and easier to use, permitting to be
installed and conﬁgured by anyone, such as family or care takers.
Our system was produced and its performance evaluated on the subset of ‘Wolf
Motor Function Test’ (WMFT). The actions involved a variety of skill levels and
practical activities. The system produced extra impairment information such as: spasticity versus stiffness, motor control, rapidity, smoothness of movements, repeatability,
fatigue and endurance, as well as the effort put in. The essential assumption was for the
expert system to evolve into an analytic tool for recognition of core impairments,
flagged through study of data created during execution of common activities. It
incorporates a BAN of wearable physiological and activity checking sensors with
objective to gather rich and highly useful data for real time data examination. Real-time
advice and power autonomy were not critical at the time. The essential objective of a
home-based system was usability as crucial to ensuring user compliance with prescribed therapies. It was anticipated to be as small as possible and employ only the

182

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

most necessary set of sensors permitting elderly to easily interact with it. Here the
power consumption was critical, similarly to real-time data examination and display. It
included immersive user interfaces such as Leap Motion [4], MS Kinect [3], EEG from
Emotiv [5] and others, integrated with many virtual and augmentation technologies to
allow fully immersive gaming experience, through e.g. supported Smart 3D TVs, 3D
projectors and AR/VR visors (Fig. 2).

Fig. 2. Physical composition of a gaming sub-system

There is a general resistance observed among elderly to using technologies on their
bodies, to some level accepted when part of the medical process. The highest problem
with acceptance is when it comes to visors, especially closed Virtual Reality ones. In
many cases users accept such technologies when used of short periods of time and
being part of a routine medical examination and/or a test, but they tend to avoid using it
alone when performing training at home. On the other hand, open Augmented Reality
glasses, though generally more expensive, are more accepted by elderly since they
resemble more standard prescription glasses. In such cases acceptance and compliance
with prescribed exercise regimes is much higher.
A generic architecture of the rehabilitation system is presented in Fig. 3. It shows a
Patient Module installed at home and offering remote physiological supervision of
one’s health signs, running therapeutical games and offering a full integration with the
online PHR service used as a database for sharing information among the elderly and
their leading physician(s).

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

183

Fig. 3. Overall rehabilitation system architecture

The architecture has been aimed to support also use of mobile devices such as
tablets, smartphones, portables etc. We developed an inexpensive combined gaming
solution suitable both for full-body and near-ﬁeld trainings. The clinician sub-system
offers link to back-ofﬁce PHR database for continuous supervision of patients’ wellbeing. Current version combined two sections, both including Kinect and Leap Motion
depth sensor (refer to Sect. 6 for more details). One set of sensors is integrated into the
horizontal table and is aimed for tracking the use of physical objects and another one is
built into a vertical section for tracing body movements. Two displays have been used,
a horizontal one for physical objects and a vertical one for displaying conventional
board games controlled either through Kinect sensor or other user interfaces. A progress of therapy and other relevant physical information, such as audio-visual teleconferencing, are supported as required. Back-ofﬁce services were open-source based
platforms like Open EMR [6] services.
Eventually, all those services have been migrated to intLIFE core PHR service
platform from Intracom Telecom. The overall gaming platform used a client-server
approach composed of a repository for games and serving them directly from the PHR
server, in such a way greatly reducing load on client devices. This permitted us both to
execute games on common everyday devices such as Smart TVs or Smartphones, at the
same time allowing to maintain the most recent versions of games with no need for
updating them on client devices. Still, as with all network connected system, one needs to
expect that connection among networked devices may not always be sustained. Therefore, we have anticipated two operational scenarios in our system: one when network is
persistent and another one when it is not (Fig. 4). In the former case when the network is
continuously available, the server is built into a home gateway, while the client device
was a game unit including a game server (repository of games and results for each user)
operates remotely from the same physical server as the one hosting PHR services. The
home unit did not need to bother about updating games to their latest versions or
managing game results. Nevertheless, when network may or may not be available at all
times, the game server needs to be hosted locally on a home gateway, together with the

184

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

Kinect Server. In the ﬁrst case, the game server can be operated remotely. In the second
scenario, the server could be run locally and use games downloaded earlier. Similarly,
physical data and game results can be either uploaded on the fly or stored locally and
uploaded as soon as the network connectivity is re-established.

Fig. 4. Online & offline use of Kinect Server for “game” management

An expert system has been designed to be working in a controlled environment
under the supervision of a physiotherapist, or other suitably competent clinician, trained
in its use. This will normally take place at a medical centre though it might be used in a
home environment too if suitable personnel are present. The expert system consists of a
range of body-worn wireless sensors (sensor BAN) and a Motion Capture (MoCap)
system using depth sensing devices (Kinect or ASUS [7]) deployed on a PC. A choice of
sensors includes kinematic sensor units (containing tri-axial accelerometers, tri-axial
gyroscopes and tri-axial magnetometers. When combined they give 9 degrees of freedom of measurements). Electromyography (EMG) sensors monitor muscle motion in
biceps and triceps, while electrocardiograph (ECG) sensors monitor the heart rate.
A kinetic sensor unit are positioned both on forearms just above the wrist and on upper
arms just above the elbow as well as on the sternum. The motion capture module is used
to trace patients as they complete given tasks and exercises, whereas video records are
used as qualitative measures of the progress of patient’s therapy. Suitable ways to secure
and achieve repeatability of sensor placement on the body was investigated during
research phase as well as possible effects of sensor orientation and misalignment.
Evaluations with expert system starts with a face-to-face discussion of the patient
with a clinician. Based on this, clinician can assess patient’s level of impairment, while
the patient informs the clinician about their personal expectations from rehabilitation

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

185

training. Such a process allows the clinician to choose a range of upper limb training
tasks and exercises that might be most suitable for a particular patient. Then measurement phase starts with a patient stimulated to complete a set of exercises and
training tasks selected from the WMFT database that have been explicitly selected by
clinicians to for the patient’s needs and apparent abilities.
A motion capture system keeps a history of patient’s actions during trainings. Via
appropriate signal processing, a motion capture system produces temporal and spatialkinetic data, such as limb placement in space, limb velocity and acceleration, joint
angles and time required to complete particular tasks. Hence, motion capture system
could be perceived as a ‘standard’ against which the data resulting from other sensors
could be compared with. During the training, physiological data from body-worn
wireless sensors is transmitted to server PC in real-time and processed in two different
ways. Raw sensor data is converted into 3-dimensional spatial info that can be
immediately compared against data generated from motion capture unit. With depthbased sensing and taking advantage of extra information from wearable Shimmer
accelerometers, body motion sensing accuracy of movements with centimetre accuracies can be practically achieved from a distance of 2–3 m. Subsequent data processing approach includes looking for patterns in the sensor data, which shows a high
correlation with expected actions of the upper limb or speciﬁc training tasks that are
performed. Home-based system uses such a data as templates for determining if such
actions are performed by patients as part of their everyday activities. Other features are
also used as indexes for assessing progress and effectiveness of the training, e.g.
including calculation of energy spending out of EMG data or assessing metabolic rate
out of ECG data. A clinician can judge patients’ condition when they perform prescribed training and make professional judgement of the patient state according to the
WMFT scoring scheme. Such a score is sent to PHR database. All raw data gathered by
body-worn wireless sensors and motion capture unit, including processed data are
saved in PHR as well [8, 14].
Subsequent visits to leading physicians may re-assess patient’s performance for the
prescribed set of training tasks out of the WMFT, permitting a long-term assessment of
the progress of rehabilitation to be determined with clinical reliability, in our case
corresponding to measure of progress of rehabilitation as determined by physiotherapists though classical set of training exercises. Since home-based systems are needed to
be used without professional involvement, they may be less complex than expert ones
and use less sensors. For example, EMG and ECG sensors may not be incorporated
into home-based BAN. Ease of use is most important as such a system needs to be run
exclusively by patients, with a support of their carers or family members.

3 Mixed-Reality Training System
The core idea of the telemedicine platform for supporting clinical training at home for
elderly people with negligible professional support has been supplemented with a
Patient Health Record (PHR) platform where training data, vital physiological and
personal data of the patients were stored. Thus, the PHR offered required medical and
personal info about the patient, which rehabilitators might require for evaluating

186

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

effectiveness and progress of the training. This means to assess the relation between
chosen exercises and speed of rehabilitation for various persons and to determine their
overall wellbeing. The PHR could be employed to inform patients about their mid-term
performance e.g. her/his, speed of rehabilitation as compared to a clinical one involving
visits to physiotherapists, including their progress over last day/weeks, thus keeping
patients’ enthusiasm high.
Beneﬁts we expected from our method is twofold, since most people feel emotionally easier training in their familiar environment, this improves and speeds up their
rehabilitation. Moreover, focusing on exercising with tools resembling game consoles,
we are able to maintain patients’ motivation. A proposed notion puts patients into a
centre of the training procedure, exploiting the fact that people feel more comfortable at
home. It has been proven that patients exercise more when training is linked with
attractive atmospheres [1]. Firstly, elderly may learn physical training exercises from
therapists at care centres. Subsequently, patients can train at home while the system
monitors their progress and provides real-time response if they perform their exercises
correctly or not. Furthermore, recorded results of the training and vital parameters of
the patient are readily available to physicians. Such a data may be then analysed for
assessing patient’s progress and determine the level of recovery. Patients can also
obtain midterm feedback about their individual recovery process. To warrant suitable
supervision, therapists get information from the PHR allowing them to assess progress
of recovery allowing them to decide if other types of exercises may need to be
introduced into the patient’s training schedule.
3.1

Game-Based Training System

Using virtual, augmented and mixed-reality immersive systems for training at home
unlocks an attractive path to improving several adverse effects happening due to brain
traumas. Such comprise assisting in a recovery of motor skills, limb-eye coordination,
orientation in space, daily routines etc. Exercises can vary from simple goal-oriented
limb moves intended to achieve a speciﬁc goal (e.g. to put a coffee cup on a table),
improving decreased motor skills (e.g. simulated driving), and many other ones. In
order to boost effectiveness of training exercises, cutting-edge haptic user interfaces
have been produced, permitting a direct body stimulus and using physical items inside
of the virtual environments, complementing visual stimulus.
Immersive interfaces have quickly found to be attractive for remote home-based
training, both performed independently and remotely supervised by therapists.
Dependent on physical interfaces, several training approaches are possible. User
interfaces like Cyber Glove [10] or Rutgers RMII Master [11] permit a handover of
patient’s limb moves to virtual gaming environments. They use pressure-sensing servos, one per ﬁnger, integrated with motion sensors. This lets therapists to accomplish a
range of motions with variable speed, fractionation (e.g. moving separate ﬁngers) and
strength (through pressure sensors). Games consist of two main classes: physical
training (e.g. DigiKey, Power Putty) and practical training (e.g. Peg Board where
objects of different shapes and sizes need to be ﬁtted into matching holes or Ball Game
requiring manipulation of different balls). Computer monitors the progress of exercises
and is used for providing a visual feedback. Cyber Gloves have been used by the

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

187

Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago [8] for evaluating patterns of ﬁnger actions when
grasping and for assessing a space of movement for diverse circumstances after stroke.
Virtual environments are gradually introduced for practical exercises and simulation of
natural surroundings, e.g. home, work, etc. Training types can include simple goaloriented movements [9] for recovering ability to execute everyday activities.
Modern rehabilitation systems, though taking advantage of the latest immersive
technologies appear to focus on proprietary and closed range of exercises, missing
comprehensively addressing a complete range of disabilities and providing a allinclusive set of rehabilitation setups. Use of technologies is also limited and fluctuates
from one system to another. Though there are systems of using avatars aimed to
provide more intuitive feedback, using many complex wearable devices (as in Fig. 2)
might become tiring for users and could reduce an effectiveness of the rehabilitation. In
our method we provided novel technologies for body motion tracking that take
advantage of the information captured by correlating info from wearable sensors with
visual feedback that have been recently available commercially, such as MS Kinect [3],
Leap Motion [4] user interfaces, and 3D mixed reality visors.
The developed system provides a full 3D visual and physical feedback via MixedReality interface and visor technologies, putting the user into a training space. Since
detecting muscle activity may not be achieved without wearable sensors, IHP GmbH
has developed a custom embedded lightweight sensor for short-range wireless communication of most common parameters such as EMG, critical medical signs like ECG,
Blood Pressure, heart rate etc. This way, rehabilitation exercises became more intuitive
by using exercise templates with feedback displaying level of compliance with prescribed exercises. Therapists are able to prescribe exercises as treatments in the
EHR/PHR platform, offering means of correlating data with changes of patient’s
condition, improving efﬁciency of patients’ recovery.
3.2

Body Sensing and User Interfaces

We developed an automated way to automatically track the correctness of performed
exercises and be able to compare patient’s body movement against correct ones
(templates). Most of the existing methods use complex sets of wearable sensors and/or
expensive visual monitoring methods. In our project we investigated modern commercial 3D scanning sensors using IR-LED technologies, such as MS Kinect [3]
released in version 2 and recently being commonly phased out by Intel’s RealSense
depth cameras [30], Prime Sense [31] and Leap Motion [4] devices. For improved
accuracy additional embedded micro sensors can be used, such as gyroscopes (often at
a price of a need for frequent position and tilt calibration) as well as more common
inertial sensors and accelerometers, detecting changes in speed. Many of such sensors
are available on the market. Furthermore, brain wave sensing with devices like
EPOC EEG U/I from Emotiv, currently used in our system as user interface, although
also beneﬁcial for detecting brain problems such as risk of seizures, while generic
sensors devices like Shimmer allow deploying a range of other modalities including
electromyographic (EMG) ones used for detecting activity of muscles during training.
Bearing in mind their very small sizes (often less than 5  5 mm in case of gyros and
accelerometers, while sensor boards often smaller than 3  4 cm) a development of

188

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

wireless and very low weight wearable sensors is feasible, able to be energyautonomous by using energy harvesting techniques.
Monitoring activity of muscles poses a problem with sensing since it has been well
known since long ago [26] that EMG represents exertion rather than the result.
Therefore, it may be unreliable as an indicator of muscle strength when they get
fatigued. As a result, measuring the force, alongside the EMG, is a signiﬁcant
advancement in determining the efﬁciency of rehabilitation plans and may show that
not only the fatigue occurs, but also if the origin of the process is central or peripheral
[12]. Standard surface EMG sensing needs precise placing of sensors over target
muscles, and so placing them in “smart” clothes for home use could make it simpler for
patients to use them and avoid wrong placement of electrodes. Electrode arrays are
commonly being developed for sensing and processing of EMG signals and can be
used to optimise received signals. Various options have been researched to provide
adequately reliable, though economic muscle activity sensing as well. We decided
therefore to employ EMG sensors on 2R Shimmer device for development purposes,
whereby use a purpose devised sensor from IHP GmbH.
Nevertheless, more types of sensors are needed for providing reliable home care for
patients apart of the EMG ones. Novel approaches are required to combine construction
nodes in a body sensor network. Commercial systems in existence offer basic info
about activity, e.g. movement and direction of speed and postures. Offering reliable
info about performance, e.g. corresponding to movement and muscle activity during a
speciﬁc task and sensing abnormalities, anticipated patterns or small changes related to
recovery, needs a higher level of complexity of data acquisition, interpretation and
processing. The challenge is to devise and build a uniﬁed multi-modal system together
with high-level analysis algorithms for extracted signal and data optimisation. The
Kinect device shows a potential for being employed as a haptic user interface [23]. It
has been used in many earlier projects, with Open Source libraries available for various
browsers, like Chrome [13], and demos compatible with Windows 7 and higher [14]
platforms. Subsequent versions improved compatibility and performance of Kinect
drivers on Windows platforms. Even that Kinect itself has been discontinued, its
technology has been transferred to such systems like HoloLens, Cortana, Intel RealSense, Windows Hello biometric facial ID system, as well as context-aware user
interfaces. Microsoft tends to suggests users to move to Intel Prime Sensor cameras for
using their cloud-powered solutions, based on Project Kinect for Azure, which combines the next generation of Microsoft’s category-deﬁning depth sensor with Azure AI
services [32].
Existing body-wearable approaches to acquiring physiological measurements are
commonly considered quite adequate though they are frequently bulky and awkward to
mount, for example electro-goniometers. They may be also expensive to implement, for
example the VIACON camera. Capabilities for being used at home is then quite
limited. Consequently, we decided to resolve those disadvantages by:

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

189

• Expanding the usability of current sensor technologies: for example, by using
MEMS accelerometers with wireless capabilities that are readily available on the
market for measuring joint angles for upper and lower limbs, thus enabling us to
offer low-cost sensors without cabling, optimized with respect to their info-content
and spatial position.
• Innovation in sensing procedures thus to lower the number of sensors that needs to
be worn on a body, at the same sustaining sufﬁciently good quality of data received.
Since many users have games consoles at home (e.g. Xbox, Nintendo Wii etc.) for
family entertainment, they can be also used to host rehabilitation applications. With
evolution of home game consoles like Xbox, human body motion will be easily to
monitor with low-cost cameras ﬁtted to e.g. Smart TV sets.
• Effortless installation and calibration even by not technically skilled users for home
use, making such a solution applicable for home use even for ﬁrst timers who are
care for by untrained family members and/or unskilled caretakers.
• Seamless validation if exercises are done correctly by patients could be based on
data captured by Body Area Networks (BAN). Those would be correlated with
treatments prescribed for individual medical condition, allowing for determining the
effectiveness of patient’s training, if it is negative or positive.
3.3

The Prototype

A prototype system implementation, integrating a range of technologies, such as
physiological monitoring with both Shimmer and Ghost sensors, user interfaces for
controlling games, not to mention rehabilitation games themselves, built using Unity3D
engine. Assembly of individual sub-systems of the “Patients home training place” is
shown in Fig. 5, and its placement on a patient in Fig. 6.

Fig. 5. Integration of the overall “home” system

190

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

Fig. 6. ECG sensing with Shimmer2R (L) and wearable EEG system (R)

The PTZ-camera used for supervision of the patient during exercises has pan-tiltzoom capabilities. Considering that very intensive training may in some cases of
recovering patients increase a risk of causing traumas, such as stroke or epilepsy, for
safety reasons we included an EEG Insight sensor from Emotiv, monitoring the brain
waves and searching for “flashes” of activity between two brain spheres, being indicated by our involved physiotherapists as signs of increased risk of pre-event condition
(Fig. 7). Such a sensor has an extra beneﬁt to be used as a catchy gaming interface,
shifting patient’s perception from its intended use as a preventive sensor to enjoying
playing games free-hands using the “power of the mind”. Emotiv offers a Unity3D
support, not to mention a more powerful INSIGHT [5] EEG sensor with smaller
number of detectors than earlier EPOCH one, 5 + 2 compared to 14 + 2.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. Emotiv Insight EEG U/I (a), brain activity mapping with Emotiv (b)

The prototype version uses the Insight EEG sensor for assessing a relationship
between the intention to move e.g. a hand and the actual action, in addition to seeking
within brain waves for any indications that might indicate risks of approaching stroke
as well as being used as a user interface similar to a “mouse”. Correlating with data

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

191

obtained from EMG sensors allows to detect instances when patient’s brain correctly
sends a signal to e.g. move an hand, which could not be executed because of a broken
nerve links.
3.3.1 The “Kinect Server”
The primary user interface for controlling rehabilitation games in our system is MS
Kinect. We take advantage of its distance sensing capabilities combined with RGB
camera, which have shown to be effective both for full body motion tracking (using its
skeleton matching algorithm) and for near-ﬁeld training e.g. for hands and legs. As
Kinect had not been originally indented to be used for close range detection and only
parts of the bodies being visible, such a skeleton tracing is not effective enough and
therefore we developed a custom algorithm for being able to determine reliably
movements of arms, hands and ﬁngers, being also able to separate those from the objects
behind. This led to building a “Kinect server”, extending available open source algorithms. The application used Open NI drivers for Linux at the beginning, then transcoded to MS Kinect 2 drivers for Windows operating systems. The “Kinect Server”
enables connections remotely to MS Kinect device and then making use of the sensor
data from a variety of client devices, which have previously not been supported by the
MS Kinect SDK. The Kinect Server prototype used initially Open NI drivers for Xbox,
later transcoded to more generic drivers provided by Microsoft in Kinect SDK 1.7 and
later versions. The Kinect Server based system is composed out of two sub-modules:
• Server – requires to run on an operating system supported by MS Kinect drivers. Its
role is to receive the data from the Kinect sensor and provide it in a suitable form
via network to remote client devices.
• Client – can be installed and executed on ANY device and operating system as long
as it offers WEB accessibility with support for Java Scripts. This implies that nearly
any device able to access the WEB, such as tablets and smartphones, not to mention
Smart TVs, and other devices are therefore natively supported and can take
advantage of MS Kinect sensor capabilities.
Range of data and info available from Kinect Server by connected clients includes:
RGB feeds, depth maps (both natively offered by Kinect sensor) and a list of detected
objects (custom data offered by Kinect Server). Custom options are offered, e.g. ability
to limit the area in which objects are detected, permitting applications to remove
background objects and be able to focus only on objects of interest (e.g. directly in
front and/or closest ones to the sensor). As the sever was built as a generic enabler,
additional gesture recognition capability has been offered as well. To enable interoperability with various commercial devices and operating systems, we selected Python
for developing our “palm_controls” scripts that are able to detect explicit motions and
map those to selected keystrokes and mouse “clicks”.
3.3.2 Embedded Kinect Server (EKS)
The disadvantages of the Kinect sensor related to the lack of seamless compatibility
with many Operating Systems, vide range of drivers that are often incompatible with
one another, need to be connected to two USB ports on different physical controllers, as
well as the requirement to be run-on high-performance workstations, made us to

192

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

investigate different ways to interact with MS Kinect sensors. Initially we aimed to run
our Embedded Kinect Server (EKS) on embedded microcomputers, such as the
Raspberry PI [28] or similar ones, thus enabling client devices to run games while
taking advantage of data received directly from EKS via local wireless network or
Ethernet. This allowed us to “break” the restriction of the physical (wired) connection
between the Kinect sensor and the game console, thus allowing 3D sensing capabilities
to be available on any networked device.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8. Embedded Kinect Server deployment: Panda board (a) and physical prototype integrated
with the MS Kinect for Windows sensor (b)

A range of embedded devices have been examined: from Raspberry PI and
eBox 3350 [15], to Panda boards (Fig. 8) [16] and a number of other ones. We
discovered though our trials that there was an inherent issue with Kinect’s design
existing in all versions, starting from Xbox one to later Windows one. The USB ports
could not supply sufﬁcient amount of current and so additional power supply was
required. Attempts to increase current supplied by USB ports on Raspberry PI devices,
using external powered USB hubs, not to mention other work-arounds, they were all
unsuccessful. Until recently, the only embedded platform able to stably operate the
Kinect sensor (keeping connectivity and be able to run EKS) was Panda Board. It has
been successfully used in our tests to execute the Mario Bros game on various Android
operated smartphones and Samsung Smart TVs, which could wirelessly connect to the
Kinect sensor for controlling the game with body gestures [35].
3.3.3 Rehabilitation Games Using the “Kinect Server”
The core functionalities supported by our Kinect Server enable limiting the ﬁeld of view,
removing background outside pre-deﬁned area, separating and classifying between
individual objects etc. This enabled us to build a Kinect-based user interface, where
compliant with needs and requirements of physiotherapists, we traded classical keyboard keys and mouse strokes with hand gestures equivalent to arrows
up/down/left/right and mouse clicks action by making a ﬁst. This way we were able to
develop our game-based training system, the ﬁrst of its kind, for rehabilitation of stroke
patients who had mobility issues after their stroke episodes. We conducted evaluations,
ﬁrst using Mario Bros game controlled entirely using hand movements. Algorithms

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

193

detecting position of the hand and producing fake key presses were ﬁrst developed with
Matlab and subsequently ported to PERL for distribution together with Kinect server to
embedded devices. They assumed that hand(s) were ﬁxed at a known distance from the
sensor on a stable support (requirement from physiotherapists) support, thus we knew
the common position of the hand with ﬁngers facing the Kinect sensor. This allowed for
easy recognition of the direction and movements of ﬁngertips. This way no calibration of
the Kinect sensor was ever required, being a commonly known problem for this device.
Removal of the surrounding objects was also simpliﬁed by ignoring anything more or
less distant from the hand and allowing us to focus our attention entirely on monitoring a
3D space from the ﬁngertip to the end of the wrist. The position of the bounding box
around the hand allowed detecting changes in hand position, while horizontal and
vertical direction to the hand section mostly extruding from the centre of gravity allowed
to determine which ﬁnger was moved, in which direction and how far. We then extended
the algorithm to more elaborated hand gestures and various combinations of movements. A custom delay between “reads” was used to set the detection “speed”. Such a
recognition algorithm, enhanced with recognition of full arm movement, could be easily
adapted to e.g. sign language recognition. To evaluate such a capability and to allow
patients to play with their full body, we have developed a test game mixing real and
virtual objects to form a mixed-reality gaming environment. In this game we requested
patients to throw a ball made of paper at the imaginary balloons (circles projected on to
the wall) as presented in Fig. 9. The Kinect device was easily able to detect the paper
ball leaving the hand and hitting a speciﬁc area of the wall. This was correlated with
projections to determine a collision, which was rewarded with “balloons” being loudly
blown into pieces to a great joy of the gamers.

Fig. 9. Throwing real paper ball at virtual targets

194

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

Such games enabled our test patients to rehabilitate their entire body, not only their
limbs. It was very entertaining not only for our users, but for their care takers alike. It
had signiﬁcant beneﬁt for rehabilitation, allowing patients to focus on improving
movements of their hand and the whole body and forgetting their disabilities at least for
some time, resulting in the increased effectiveness of their training.
3.3.4 Full-Body Exercising Through “Avateering”
We subsequently examined various other, more advanced games that could be used for
full-body rehabilitation. They were developed using 3D gaming engines and took
advantage of the avateering, i.e. featuring transfer of the physical body movements to
the virtual character in the game (avatar). Our ﬁrst approach required “hacks” built by
Kinect developer communities to enable embedding games into WEB pages. The most
suitable one for our use was ZigFu [17]. Its advantage was that it was compatible with
Open NI drivers Unity3D [18] gaming engine.

Fig. 10. Avateering in a “home” environment

It was simpler in use than other commercial ones like Brekel [19] or Autodesk
Motion Builder [20]. To make games more intuitive and familiar for our users (often
elderly and people unfamiliar with computer games) we modelled gaming environments to resemble natural spaces with photorealistic quality [21]. The example presented in Fig. 10 (left) shows a “Virtual Room” built in Unity3D [24], with test subject
testing avateering algorithm in Fig. 10 (right).
An inherent beneﬁt from using 3D gaming engines such as Unity3D, Cry Engine or
Unreal Engine was an opportunity to produce games that could be executed both as
stand-alone applications on supported computers and consoles, or embedded into WEB
pages and executed using a classical WEB browser. This made it easier to integrate
games into the PHR platform, where they were prescribed by physicians and physiotherapists as therapies, distributed and operated using WEB browsers on any networked
client device. Games contained embedded versions of custom-built Kinect Server plugins. More recently we integrated also the electromyographic (EMG) “Myo” [22] sensor
from Thalmic Labs. It allowed us to detect electrical signals on the skin that were
caused by movement of the muscles. This offered two main advantages, one to allow
physiotherapists to get an indication if control signals from the brain reach the muscles.

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

195

Furthermore, this offered us additional data for being used as an additional user
interface. With provision of various support software by the manufacturer, offering
support for programming 3rd-party applications making use of this sensors, with plugin
for Unity3D and the application translating various muscle signals to gestures, we were
able to map them subsequently to keystrokes and mouse clicks for explicit use in our
games. Furthermore, the SDK gives direct access to raw signals from all eight EMG
sensors (around a band that can be placed on a forearm or an arm), which enabled us to
process raw signals as well in order to improve the accuracy and reliability of our user
interface. Using such an approach we adapted the “Amazing Skater” game template
from Ace Games [23] that was built in Unity3D and added the EMG as a user interface
(screenshots are presented in Fig. 11). This was an incentive-based game combining
rehabilitation with entertainment, allowing to avoid using Kinect sensor in favour of a
more compact and easier controlled user interface, detecting muscle activities.

Fig. 11. The “Skater Game” adapted from a template by Ace Games

The game can be played using either a keyboard or a Myo sensor. The latter is
supported through a Unity3D plugin, though it can be also operated using custom
StrokeBack application proﬁle via Myo Application Manager.

4 Personal Health Record Systems
The Personal Health Record (PHR) solutions deﬁne a manageable, integrated, flexible
and expandable system for provision of care management services and management of
patient data. According to NAHIT report [36] regarding deﬁnition of key technological
terms related to e-health, the following deﬁnitions apply:
• Electronic Medical Record (EMR): An electronic record of health-related information on an individual that can be created, gathered, managed, and consulted by
authorized clinicians and staff within one health care organization.
• Electronic Health Record (EHR): An electronic record of health-related information
on an individual that conforms to nationally recognized interoperability standards
and that can be created, managed, and consulted by authorized clinicians and staff
across more than one health care organization.
• Personal Health Record (PHR): An electronic record of health-related information
on an individual that conforms to nationally recognized interoperability standards
and that can be drawn from multiple sources while being managed, shared, and
controlled by the individual.

196

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

The core feature of the PHR, which distinguishes it from the EMR and EHR, is that
info contained within it is under the control of the individual. The above deﬁnition
names such individuals as controllers, but leaves room for other bodies to act in the
individual’s interest, having a control over the access to PHR. Such agents may be
expressly declared by the individual, though not in all cases. For example, agents acting
on behalf of an individual include parents for their children, and later in life, children
acting for parents. The individual is distinctively a guardian of information stored or
accessible within a PHR, who decides what volumes of information to include, how it
is maintained and ordered, and who can read it or “check it out”. Standards and policy
will need to determine if and how individuals can delete or modify information in a
PHR that originated from an EHR and how these modiﬁcations are communicated to
other providers with whom the data in the PHR are shared. Having control also means
that an individual’s PHR can exist independently of the entity that sponsors it—the
PHR is portable. This requirement for portability excludes models in which sponsors
such as health insurers or health care providers give individuals access to health-related
information that is dependent on the individual remaining with that sponsor.
The long-term goal of a PHR is to be a lifelong resource of pertinent health
information for an individual. Thus, it should have both the depth and breadth of
information to enable individuals to become more engaged in their own healthcare as
they move from being passive recipients to active participants in their personal health
management. The health information in a PHR can be drawn from a broad range of
possible sources. The sum of these and other inputs is a well-rounded picture comprising clinical information, administrative information, and wellness information for
individuals to employ and impart to others at their discretion. Signiﬁcant sources may
include, but are not limited to:
• Individuals—Self-generated information for personal management or information
for care providers, including information about allergies, prescribed medications,
eating habits, exercise objectives, the progression of an illness or recovery from it,
and preferences regarding care in various circumstances.
• Health care providers—Including hospitals, skilled nursing homes, long term care,
and other facilities; pharmacies, lab, and facilities reporting test results.
• Health care clinicians—Including physicians, nurses, behavioural health professionals, registered dieticians, chiropractors, and other licensed or certiﬁed care
providers.
• Medical devices—Instruments, machines and implanted devices monitoring clinical
indices, for immediate use as well as for historical purposes.
• Wellness promoters—Entities supplying services or information to generate and
maintain good health, such as proactive medicine centres, ﬁtness centres, rehabilitation experts, and complementary/alternative medicine practitioners.
• Health insurers—Information arising from claims for insurance payments, disease
management programs recommending certain actions and collecting results,
updated information on drugs in a formulary, and other coverage policies speciﬁc to
an individual.

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

197

• Public health—Government health departments, disease surveillance and immunization programs, school-based care providers and social workers, and nongovernmental organizations engaged in health and wellness.
• Research institutions—Information about opportunities to engage in clinical trials
and studies, and recently published results of interest to the individual.
The HL7 [8] standard from the HL7 EHR Work Group [9], describes PHR as the
patient-centric system that is mostly controlled by the individual and governs the form
and technical development of interoperable PHR/EHR systems.
The overarching theme of a PHR-S involves a patient centric tool that is controlled
for the most part, by the individual. It should be immediately available electronically,
and able to link to other systems, either in a “pull-push” or “push-pull” method. The
PHR-S is intended to provide functionality to help an individual maintain a longitudinal view of his or her health history, and may be comprised of information from a
plethora of sources—i.e., from providers and health plans, as well as from the individual. Data collected by the system is administrative and/or clinical, and the tool may
provide access to a wealth of forms (advance directives) and advice (diet, exercise,
disease management). A PHR-S would help the individual collect behavioural health,
public health, patient entered and patient accessed data (including medical monitoring
devices), medication information, care management plans and the like, and could be
connected to providers, laboratories, pharmacies, nursing homes, hospitals and other
institutions and clinical resources. At its core, the PHR-S should provide the ability for
the individual to capture and maintain demographic, insurance coverage, and provider
information. It should also provide the ability to capture health history in the form of a
health summary, problems, conditions, symptoms, allergies, medications, laboratory
and other test results, immunizations and encounters. Additionally, personal care
planning features such as advance directives and care plans should be available. The
system must be secure and have appropriate identity and access management capabilities, and use standard nomenclature, coding and data exchange standards for consistency and interoperability. A host of optional features have been addressed over the
course of this initiative, including secure messaging, graphing for test results, patient
education, guideline-based reminders, appointment scheduling and reminders, drugdrug interactions, formulary management, health care cost comparisons, document
storage and clinical trial eligibility. The effective use of a PHR-S is a key point for
improving healthcare in terms of self-management, patient-provider communication
and quality outcomes.
The PHR provides all necessary functionalities to assist the individual in maintaining a continuous insight into his/her medical history, including info coming from a
number of sources. It assists an individual in collecting vital physiological data (e.g.
from medical monitoring devices), health info, care management plans and alike,
potentially connecting also to providers, labs, pharmacies, nursing homes, clinics and
similar organisations and medical resources. The PHR encompasses the whole health
history, including health issues, conditions, symptoms, allergies, medicines, lab test
results, immunizations and visits. Considering the sensitivity of data on record, such
platforms need to be secure and employ sufﬁcient access management, authentication
and authorisation mechanisms. There are two distinct dimensions to be highlighted:

198

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

• Integrated care management plans or integration with related third-party systems:
Current PHR systems do not adequately support this need. Take for example
Google Health or Microsoft Health Vault: notwithstanding the fact that these
products offer very attractive web interfaces for the patients to edit and store their
personal record of health-related information they lack of any functionality related
to the lay out and maintenance of a rehabilitation plan. Typically, this need is
covered by special purpose software solutions that are entirely clinicians-oriented
and do not actively put the patients in the loop (i.e. not Personal Health Systems). In
contrast, our approach is patient-centric: the intention of the project is to build a
PHR-S that facilitates personal care planning. This does not mean that the clinicians
are made subordinates in the rehabilitation process: the proposed PHR-S facilitates
their tele-supervision, if granted such a right by the patients.
• Standard nomenclature, coding and data exchange standards for consistency and
interoperability: The signiﬁcance of these parameters is that they ensure human
readability and machine processability of health-related data. In HL7, the former is
guaranteed by a Clinical Document Architecture (CDA) HL7 standard, while the
latter is guaranteed by v2.x or v3 HL7 Messaging standard. HL7 CDA is an XMLbased mark-up standard intended to specify the encoding, structure and semantics of
clinical documents for exchange. The CDA speciﬁes that the content of the document consist of a mandatory textual part (which ensures human interpretation of the
document contents) and optional structured parts (for software processing). The
structured part relies on coding systems (such as from SNOMED and LOINC) to
represent concepts. The consortium is not aware of any PHR-S that claims full
adoption of the HL7 CDA. For example, Google Health supports a subset of CCR
[3], a competing standard to CDA, while Microsoft Health Vault claims to support a
subset of CCR and CDA [4], but actually only for importing information from other
systems, and not for exporting [5]. As for the underlying messaging scheme, to our
knowledge, none of these PHR-S claim support of a widely used standard messaging scheme, such as those of HL7.
On top of the above one should add the need for a controllable, integrated, yet fully
open ICT solution that ensures the smooth execution of the project trials. The accumulated experience indicates that while a signiﬁcant amount of yet unmet ICT-related
end-user related requirements arise whenever a new medical issue is examined within
an R&D project, in most of the cases neither the legacy ICT systems in the trials sites
are open and accessible nor the IT personnel easily accepts intervention and links to
such systems. From this perspective, by embedding within the project ICT environment
a novel, open PHR-S allows StrokeBack to deliver a self-contained ICT solution able to
be deployed in both rich and virgin e-Health environments.
4.1

Overview of Personal Health Record (PHR) Systems

There are various open-source as well as commercial implementations of PHR platforms available in the market. One of the most well-known ones is Microsoft
HealthVault [27], which offers online service for storing and maintaining various types
of health-related information. The HealthVault platform has capabilities of a typical

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

199

search engine, permitting users to scan speciﬁcally for medical information. Patients
may store their personal medical records as well as the prescription history, manage
their records, upload medical data from such devices as blood pressure monitors,
glucose meters, weights, thermometers and then process this and manage this data. The
information can be then shared with other types of medical and health management
WEB portals and/or immediately with their physicians or general practitioners. The
HealthVault includes also a desktop client allowing medical information to be received
from various types of personal physiological measuring devices to be then sent to the
PHR. From most common open source implementations, Tolven [21] is the most
characteristic one that focuses on providing an electronic Personal Health Record
(PHR) enabling users to capture and individually share their health information in a
secure way. Another open-source PHR solution one is Indivo X [25], which is promoted as Personally-Controlled Health Record (PCHR), a system, which offers means
of creating a PHR, with links to other PHRs as well.
4.2

Generic Architecture of the PHR System

The functions are supported by a Personal Health Record (PHR) system enable individuals to manage information about his or her healthcare. They provide direction as to
the individual’s ability to interact with a Personal Health Record in such a way to
individualize the record and maintain a current and accurate record of his or her
healthcare activities. They include activities such as managing wellness, prevention and
encounters. Such functions are designed to encourage and allow an individual to
participate actively in his/her healthcare and better access the resources that allow for
self-education and monitoring [8]. The principal users of these functions are expected
to be individuals referenced as account holders; the patient or subject of care and
healthcare providers will have access to certain functions to view, update or make
corrections to their Personal Health Record. The Account Holder will receive appropriate decision support, as well as support from the PHR-S to enable effective electronic communication between providers, and between the provider and the account
holder or account holder’s designated representative.
Intracom Telecom has implemented its own proprietary version of the PHR platform, named intLIFE, which integrates a range of healthcare application, targeting a
number of chronic diseases as well as supports generic wellbeing services. Custommade adaptations were made to ensure safe sharing of users’ medical data with proper
procedures, ensuring sufﬁcient level of private data protection. It secures a controlled
access to such data via custom authentication ad authorisation mechanisms, thus
guaranteeing that all data that may be circulated around, could neither be traced back to
nor be used to identify the person from whom such data had been obtained from. In
such a way, a health system that is based on Intracom’s PHR services can be used
securely and safely for production of clinical models created from massive amounts of
raw data from vast number of patients. This permits a more reliable feature-based
medical diagnosis for other patients and determining a range of conditions that had not
been possible before. In order to safeguard the privacy and security of information
stored within the EHR/PHR to essential levels, both the Management subsystem and
the Vital Signs Monitoring one are linked together via encrypted interfaces employing

200

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

authentication, authorisation and data anonymization modules. The PHR developed by
Intracom has a modular architecture supporting effortlessly adding and removing any
functional sub-systems. This was achieved by separating business layers from underlying technical frameworks. The former one corresponds to end user needs in a given
domain, whereby the latter horizontal layers offer generic, business agnostic functionalities (Fig. 12).

Fig. 12. PHR-S platform architecture

The Middleware Framework provides a flexible and conﬁgurable link between
internal and external modules. The capability maintained by this layer is associated
with API management, rights management, user interfaces and the presentation layer.
The Presentation Framework provides auxiliary application guidance and access from
various WEB browsers. The foundation for the design of this layer was ensuring
independence of the graphical user interface from the business domain.
In order to facilitate the independent development of applications and services by
third parties that can be easily integrated and glued with the core PHR system, we will
follow a modular programming approach. The advantage of this approach is that it
provides us with great flexibility in assigning discrete functions to each of the modules
and allows easy integration through appropriate interfaces. The PHR includes a set of
core modules that are necessary independently of the value-added services that are
provided to end users. Such core modules include:
• External adapter controller module responsible for directing calls to appropriate
ESPs components; it also includes libraries for translation to HL7 messages, so as to
support standard based communication with external systems.
• User management module providing functionalities related to the administration
and management of the users who have access to the PHR-S and the various
applications and services built on top of it. It includes aspects related to access
rules and user roles. Appropriate interfaces of the User Management Module

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

201

enable access by third party applications and facilitate a centralized approach in
users management.
• Permission management module enabling account holders (health record owners
or their designees) to manage access rights (permissions) to their PHR. and controls
access to protected resources.
• Audit management module enabling logging of information related to the transactions being executed in the PHR-S. Such transactions may include log in
attempts, modiﬁcations of permissions, modiﬁcation of PHR content, etc. It logs
timestamps and respective user who is involved for each transaction.
On top of the above, one can easily build independent business services around the
core PHR-S. The exact services to be built will be based on the outcome of the end user
requirements collection and elicitation process. Nevertheless, we can rather safely
present in this paragraph some indicative services that are in line with the general
objectives of the project as apposed in the Description of Work:
• General Health Record Service providing patients with access to their medical data
(general demographics, family history data, vaccinations, allergies, etc.).
• General Health Record Service Extensions providing extra functionality to the
patients, correlated with disease-speciﬁc aspects. Indicative such extensions provide
functionality related to the management of post-incident health interventions, diabetes, COPD, nutrition and general lifestyle, etc.
• Exercise Guidance Service guiding patients while executing a predeﬁned set of
activities and/or physical exercises –possibly set up by the clinician using the Care
Management Service Module see below-. It may provide direct –online- feedback to
the subject, during the execution of the activities or offline feedback, after the end of
an activity session.
• Care Management Service providing clinicians with the necessary functionality in
order to set up and monitor plans related to the management of the disease of their
patient. This module has different extensions, depending on the disease: e.g. it is
different for stroke patients, diabetics, COPDs, etc.
• Videoconference Service enabling patients and clinicians to keep undergo live
videoconference sessions. Service conﬁguration parameters are dedicated to
deﬁning who and how often can establish such a session. This feature addresses the
need described by the clinicians to be able to put relatively strict rules as to how
often their patients may call them in the course of the day.
• Quality of Life Surveys Service: This service enables the patient to participate in
questionnaire-based surveys related to her quality of life.

5 Overall System Integration
The prototype architecture compliant with expressed user requirements, led to te
selection of relevant use cases and a range of components needed for each of those use
cases. Moreover, features of the “look and feel” for the developed system and the
deployment at patient’s homes and within their life has been built into the design. As a

202

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

consequence of additional research on the minimum space between patient and distance
sensors, the ﬁrst prototype of the home unit for patients’ use has been created. This
server as a reference for matching advances in other subsystems.

Fig. 13. Prototypes of the mobile patient station for home use.

Various versions of training games were tested and have been enhanced following a
feedback from physiotherapists and end users. Similar approach has been followed in
the development of PHR services, “Exercise and Compensation Analyse (ECA)” tool
as well as user interfaces embedded into the mobile unit. Regarding events envisaged to
be used for using rehabilitation games, an event capture algorithm has been created
using close-range distance sensors, including Kinect and Leap Motion, which concentrated on movements of wrists and palms, such as open and close actions for the
latter ones, both being indicated by clinicians as most important for the effective
rehabilitation of post-stroke patients. After putting together all components into the
integrated system, combining range/distance sensors with ECA tool for body motion
capture, the performance of the close-range Kinect devices reduced signiﬁcantly when
both were used at the same time. Therefore, we decided to make all components to use
data from just one Kinect device, integrating it as far-ﬁeld sensor while applying LeapMotion one for detection of near-ﬁeld motions and interactions with games.
The experimental assessment of the integrated Mobile Patient Unit and its corresponding training regimes started from the review of the overall physical design with
vertical and horizontal displays. The ﬁrst version of the system was bulky and weighty;
therefore, a second smaller variant was built (Fig. 13). The former one has been
designed with clinical (stationary) use in mind, while the latter one offers few innovative technical enhancements. Speciﬁcally, the close-range detection with Kinect
sensor was replaced with the Leap Motion one built into the base of the unit, to take
over the tracking and recognition of hand gestures. In this way, the overall size of the
mobile unit could be lowered by 30 to 40% with weight 50% lower.

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

203

6 Deployment and Validation
A dedicated pilot study has been organized in Germany in order to validate the
usability and practicality of the developed PHR system and the Care Management
services. The system has been installed at the Brandenburg Klinik Berlin-Brandenburg
[29] and evaluated with a control group of 25 patients. The aims of those evaluations
were to check if the developed framework was “usable and useful”, and if the
implemented Care Management services are beneﬁcial for the physiotherapists in
conducting their rehabilitation work and help patients in achieving improvement of
their motor functions. Project participants were all involved in performing both the
technical validation of the system functionalities and the initial assessments with end
users. We followed a speciﬁc process to validate the rehabilitation system:
• Users switching on the rehabilitation unit.
• Users launching “Tele-rehabilitation” process with the “touch table”.
• Users selecting “autonomous training” that is the training mode when exercises are
performed without direct involvement of physiotherapists. The “auto training”
mode was selected automatically in case of no connection to server.
• User selected a game and executed it, custom selection depending on earlier scores
and adjusted a level of difﬁculty. In case that exercises included background music,
user could select a favourite one. The whole selection process had been conﬁgured
earlier by physiotherapists who decoded which options were to be made available to
patients.
• Users started the exercise in an autonomous mode. The PHR physiological monitoring sub-system assessed and analysed user operation and generated feedback. In
the end, results and scores achieved were sent to the PHR.
• Users run exercises with online supervision by physiotherapists. They were constantly supervised, could see their clinicians via teleconferencing and could
instantly receive instructions how to correctly perform their exercises.
• Users could check their scores and evaluation results after completing them.
Evaluation results conﬁrmed our earlier expectations that Kinect could not be used
reliably at close range and for tracking movement of upper limbs, especially when it
concerned movements of ﬁngers and even hand gestures. It also required calibration
every so often. On the other hand, the Leap Motion sensor has proven more beneﬁcial
in such situations, providing a reliable and precise tracking of hands and ﬁngers. Based
on such results, the ﬁnal (commercial) solution combining advantage of both sensors
and certainly reducing their respective disadvantages, could be produced, in which
Kinect was placed in vertical section of the mobile unit to monitor full body motion and
interaction with the surrounding environment, while the Leap Motion being installed in
the flat part of the unit was used for short range interactions with games using hand
gestures and interaction with virtual objects using ﬁngers, whose movements were
transferred via avateering to virtual hands.
We integrated a teleconferencing functionality into our system to evaluate beneﬁts
of teletherapeutic interventions. In most cases, young users could achieve better results,
whereby interactions with aphasic users has proven more complex, in some cases

204

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

impossible, with neuropsychological issues causing a barrier. Speciﬁcally, complicated
verbal directions were often misinterpreted by users. In this context the “Selective
Repetitive Movements” and “Arm Ability Training” types of exercises have shown
best user compliance, which could be explained by exercises being easier to demonstrate visually. Therapists used the following procedures:
1. Restricting rehabilitation games to upper limbs
2. Employing evidence-based interventions during exercises
3. Focusing on motor functions, cognitive skills and fast system response
The produced three types of tests based on earlier deﬁned technical specs:
• “Selective Repetitive Movements”, a set involving joints and movements of upper
limbs with main attention to hands, especially distal movements. We postulate that
such exercises could be readily linked with mixed-reality games. Using such
gaming methodology helps in overcoming the problem of high number of monotonous repetitions, thus improving users’ motivation, compliance and attention on
correctly performing their rehabilitation exercises.
• “Arm Ability Training”, a set where we promote use of everyday objects, where we
see a potential to motivate our users. Speciﬁcally, we address here problems with
users who lacking everyday exercises as part of their daily routines. Therefore,
interventions considered here required focussed attention not only to motor capabilities, but also to cognitive and sensitivity ones.
• “Music Supported Training”, asset not needing any previous musical tutoring. It
uses music as means of improving user motivation. Various musical devices may be
used, whereby for simplicity of use we chose a synthesiser keyboard.
The three above mentioned types of training procedures made it possible to combine patients with different impairments into the same intervention group and apply the
same types of telerehabilitation exercises. This also provide sufﬁcient variability in case
that some users might chose other rehabilitation exercises, while ensuring maintaining
his/her motivation and compliance. We provide a full set of guidelines to users to
ensure that they can follow correctly the rehabilitation training routines.
In order to speed up rehabilitation speed, exercises require investigation from point
of view of: visual and interaction attractiveness, effective operation of the exercises and
probably the most difﬁcult one to achieve, the real time assessment of the correctness of
performing exercises by end users. Constraints to be taken into consideration are
mainly how well patients perform their rehabilitation and how much improvement is
achieved, physiological data taken both during exercises and in daily living activities,
cognitive abilities and so on. The analysis we do follows clinical models relating
wellbeing with physiological data, based on the results from Virtual Physiological
Human (VPH) project [33], to which we have added new variables corresponding to
the improvement of physical and cognitive capabilities based on clinical experiences
and used as indicators for remote rehabilitation, periodically veriﬁed in clinical environments by medical professionals. An extensive historical overview of physiological
models can be found in [34].
Since using only few classical rehabilitation exercises was not suitable from therapeutic perspective because of the complex nature and varying types of impairments

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

205

faced by individuals, we opted for creating a system where it could be individually
conﬁgured and geared to ﬁt speciﬁc clinical rehabilitation needs of the patients. The
system had to be able to “learn” new training types in real-time, meaning adaptation to
changing movements of the patient, thus allowing the system to assess body motion
with respect to pre-deﬁned exercises at a later time.
We appreciate the fact that patients may not always perform in the similar manner
and movements may not be repeated exactly as they had been recorded. Furthermore,
assessment and measuring of the position of joints using Kinect exhibits certain level of
inaccuracies. Therefore, the system needs to be adjustable to user’s rehabilitation
conditions and level of progress, including custom precision of detecting movements.
The latest prototype calculates a deviation from the reference set of body motions as a
variation in the off-axis angles for every vector associated with a speciﬁc part of the
body, e.g. upper or lower limbs. The acceptable deviation from the reference movements in the pre-recorded training may be customised, before launching the supervisory
application. The latter one was enhanced with a support for overseeing several exercises simultaneously. Each of them may be adjusted to provide a pre-deﬁned type of
feedback when performing correctly the exercise.
6.1

Execution of Rehabilitation Studies

To ensure high reliability of study results, we strictly followed a certain set of procedures and had provided guides to patients and physiotherapists before starting the
evaluations. They comprised relevant info for patients and “informed consent forms”
outlining the scope of the tests and requesting permission to e.g. capture and use
personal data for the sole purpose of the tests. This has followed a face-to-face interview after which users were requested to sign the “informed consent forms” before
being able to take part in the evaluation tests. Following the tests, a separate set of
questionnaires was ﬁlled for each patient to individually assess their performance
during the studies. Their responses provided a base for assessing the results of the
rehabilitation from the perspective of achieved outcomes, usability and technical
practicability of our proposed method.
6.2

Evaluation of Pilot Results

The evaluations were combined with a number of classical rehabilitation exercises and
means to judge the effectiveness of the newly adopted procedures. Each user from the
group of 25 patients engaged in the evaluations took part in the trials for a period of six
weeks. Over this period, evaluations have been performed 4 times every two weeks
throughout the whole evaluation period. We employed the WMFT as standard means
of evaluating patients’ physical capabilities. The WMFT process that we used consisted
out of 17 smaller tasks that each patient was expected to execute, while the physiotherapist rated their performance in a scale from 0, corresponding to very bad
achievements, to 5, representing normal scores, towards perfect achievement. The aim
of the task was to place nine (9) little timber slats into corresponding holes on a flat
board. Then they were to place them back at their original places. The goal was for
patient to achieve this task as quickly as they could.

206

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

The second test has been performed when seated and its purpose was to move dices
from one box to another one over a small obstruction wall within one minute, from
right to left and back again. The score was calculated as the number of dices moved
during the time limit. The Barthel Index was used to assess patient’s motor skills and as
a result also the effectiveness of the rehabilitation. This is a kind of analysis using an
observer judging and providing a score for a trainee, in this case by the physiotherapist
or a clinician. It offers a way to evaluate patient capabilities associated with daily
activities. It includes such common tasks as going to toilet, eating and drinking,
movability, personal hygiene, dressing and undressing, incontinence and ability to
climb staircases. The tests of this kind were assessed in scale between 0 corresponding
to a person completely independent to 10 representing worst case scenario of a person
totally dependent of care from third persons. The total of the scores from all tests
provided the ﬁnal evaluation results and the actual condition of the person. The rating
has been performed by interviewer by ﬁlling a speciﬁc questionnaire. The questionnaire
was ﬁlled by the patient who was expected to answer 49 questions about their everyday
activities, personal characteristics, family relations, speech abilities, movability, social
activities etc. Every question was scored from 0 to 5, corresponding to bad and normal
respectively. The higher the score was, the better the effectiveness of the rehabilitation
was.

7 Conclusions
The development of the Electronic Health Record (EHR) clinical systems and the
Personal Health Record (PHR) ones were the outcome of the intrinsic problem of the
medical professionals in effectively managing the increasing amount of paper archives
and all types of printed medical records. The absence of uniﬁed way of transferring
information among electronic medical systems made the situation even more difﬁcult.
The introduction of the HL7 standard [8, 9] provided reference rules and procedures as
a means to resolve this situation, though since the beginning the HL7 was treated only
as guidelines and not a factual standard of rules to be strictly followed. This caused
electronic systems to be developed and used that employed only different subsets of the
HL7 speciﬁcation [9] that suited the given medical service provider and not the
complete standard. Transferring information among systems build in such a way
proved to be difﬁcult, causing much information to be misinterpreted or made
incomplete. This issue has been identiﬁed early as a critical one for future wide-spread
of electronic communication among clinical systems. Now the HL7 is considered more
as a factual base for providing interoperability criteria for smooth operation of medical
systems. However, since it still misses device level interoperability, more work is still
needed for ensuring seamless mobile physiological monitoring with links to diverse
clinical systems. In our projects, the work progressed towards merging both areas of
electronic health record interoperability with device level certiﬁcation, which has
resulted in creation of the proprietary implementation of the PHR core services by
Intracom, the intLIFE core platform, where core interoperability components are fully
compatible with HL7 speciﬁcation, with remote monitoring ensured to be performed
with devices certiﬁed for use for critical medical applications. The intLIFE platform

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

207

embeds purpose deﬁned device proﬁles allowing linking any certiﬁed medical device
with its electronic repository of medical measurements and clinical information.
The formal technical validation tests conﬁrmed the usability of the developed
system. It proves to be beneﬁcial to clinicians for acquiring and storage of physiological information about their patients, not to mention integration of various applications and services for processing and assessment of such a data. We speciﬁcally
validated the usability of user interfaces such as Leap Motion operating gaming
application, especially for those using immersive and natural interactions within virtual
and mixed reality 3D environments. After the successful technical validation tests, the
evaluations with real users, patients and clinicians have been conducted. They concentrated on body motion capture and acquiring movements of the real person
(physiotherapist) to be used later for demonstrating the correct way of performing
exercises by avateering as presented in Fig. 10. Those were integrated into the complete system along with server offering custom selection of games, treated as therapies
prescribed by clinicians in the same way that medicines are. Links with PHR online
platform provided a clinical base for managing both the game selections, personal and
clinical patient data as well as games scores and physiological data obtained from
medical devices. It also offered means for correlating all this data to produce the best
overall view of the current condition of the patient, both physical and mental.
Evaluations with real users allowed to reﬁne all aspects of therapeutic interventions.
Although physiotherapists may still strongly depend on classical occupational therapies
and focussing on personal rehabilitation, they commonly agree with the added beneﬁts
from employing the automatic clinical assessment of subjcts’ motor skills and progress
of recovery compliant with WMFT, as well as computer-based occupational exercises
with both real and physical objects in mixed-reality environments. Apart from classical
exercises, everyday activities can be effortlessly supervised using Body Area Networks
(BAN) of sensors throughout the day with proper consideration for rights to privacy of
the individuals, by restricting direct access to certain private raw data by physicians and
care takers, instead offering processed diagnosis and relevant physiological data only.
Data gathered from long-term monitoring of basic movements in semi-natural scenarios
(over three weeks period) has been used to improve the accuracy of ADL recognition
algorithms. They were employed as basis for developing novel application-speciﬁc
integrated circuits (ASIC) used for automated detection of various types of movements.
Individualized training and novel compensational analysis components have also been
integrated into a single Exercise Evaluation Tool (EET). The EET offers beneﬁts for
exercising e.g. upper limbs with recorded movement traces, which patients are
expected to follow. The EET can automatically analyse the correctness of such exercises. The previous version has been extended by ﬁne-tuning for individual sections of
the limbs (e.g. shoulder, upper and lower arm, etc.). For examples we can determine
how much the patient’s movement varies from the correct ones. Similar features were
also implemented for detecting compensational moves during exercises, such as if
patient remains standing during exercises with speciﬁc objects.
In conclusion we could notice signiﬁcant changes among medical communities fter
the introduction of electronic health records, enhancing the efﬁciency of medical services at a lower cost, while continuing to offer a wide range of research challenges,
which we expect to be pursued and likely resolved in the near future.

208

E. Vogiatzaki and A. Krukowski

Acknowledgements. The work leading to the results presented in this chapter originated from a
number of projects and have received funding from such sources as the “European Union’s
Seventh Framework Programme” for research, technological development and demonstration
under grant agreement no 288692-StrokeBack (“Telemedicine System Empowering Stroke
Patients to Fight Back”) and COST Action under grant agreement no IC1303-AAPELE
(“Algorithms, Architectures and Platforms for Enhanced Living Environments”).

References
1. Kirchhof, P., Adamou, A., Knight, E., Lip, G.Y.H., Norrving, B., de Pouvourville, G.: How
Can We Avoid a Stroke Crisis? (2009). ISBN 978-1-903539-09-5
2. Foerch, C., Misselwitz, B., Sitzer, M., Steinmetz, H., Neumann-Haefelin, T.: Die
Schlaganfallzahlen bis zum Jahr 2050. Deutsches Ärzteblatt 105(26), 467–473 (2008)
3. Microsoft Kinect sensor. http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/kinectforwindows
4. Leap Motion sensor (2018). https://www.leapmotion.com
5. Emotiv EEG interfaces (2018). http://emotiv.com
6. Open EMR project (2017). http://www.open-emr.org
7. ASUS sensor (2018). http://www.asus.com/Multimedia/Xtion
8. HL7 EHR System Functional Model: A Major Development towards Consensus on
Electronic Health Record System Functionality, White Paper (2004)
9. HL7: Health Level Seven International (2007). www.hl7.org
10. Virtual Technologies (2018). http://www.cyberglovesystems.com/all-products
11. Bouzit, M., Burdea, G., Popescu, G., Boian, R.: The Rutgers Master II—new design forcefeedback glove. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 7(2), 256–263 (2002)
12. Giles, J.: Inside the race to hack the Kinect. New Sci. 208(2789), 22–23 (2010). ISSN 02624079
13. MIT Media Lab Hacks the Kinect for Browser Navigation with Gestures (2017). http://www.
readwriteweb.com/2010/11/24/kinect_browser_navigation
14. Krukowski, A., Barca, C.C., Vogiatzaki, E., Rodríguez, J.M.: Patient health record
(PHR) system. In: Maharatna, K., Bonﬁglio, S. (eds.) Systems Design for Remote
Healthcare, pp. 173–200. Springer, New York (2014). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-46148842-2_6
15. eBox (2017). http://robosavvy.com/store/product_info.php/products_id/1704
16. Panda Board (2018). http://www.pandaboard.org
17. ZigFu for Unity3D (2017). http://zigfu.com
18. Unity3D game engine (2017). http://unity3d.com
19. Kinect marker-less motion capture (Brekel) (2018). http://www.brekel.com
20. Motion Builder (2018). http://www.autodesk.com/products/motionbuilder
21. Tolven Open Source Project. http://home.tolven.org. Accessed 6 Apr 2015
22. Myo Gesture Control Armband (2018). https://www.thalmic.com/en/myo
23. “Amazing Skater” from Ace Games (2017). http://www.acegames.in
24. Virtual Room (2017). https://www.assetstore.unity3d.com/en/#!/content/6468
25. INDIVO Personally Controlled Health Record (2017). http://indivohealth.org
26. Büteﬁsch, C., Hummelsheim, H., Denzler, P., Mauritz, K.H.: Repetitive training of isolated
movements improves the outcome of motor rehabilitation of the centrally paretic hand.
J. Neurol. Sci. 130, 59–68 (1995)
27. MS Health Vault (2017). https://www.healthvault.com
28. Raspberry PI (2018). http://www.raspberrypi.org

Maintaining Mental Wellbeing of Elderly at Home

209

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

Brandenburgklinik (2018). http://www.brandenburgklinik.de
Intel Real Sense camera (2018). https://software.intel.com/realsense
Prime Sense sensors (2018). https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PrimeSense
MS Project Kinect for Azure (2017). https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/kinect
Virtual Physiological Human (VPH) (2018). http://www.vph-institute.org/
Michmizos, K., Nikita, K.: Physiological systems modelling, simulation, and control. In:
Abu-Faraj, Z.O. (ed.) Handbook of Research on Biomedical Engineering Education and
Advanced Bioengineering Learning: Interdisciplinary Concepts. IGI Global, June 2012.
https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-0122-2.ch017
35. Cipitelli, E., Gasparrini, S., et al.: Depth stream compressions for enhanced real time fall
detection by multiple sensors. In: IEEE 4th International Conference on Consumer
Electronics Berlin (ICCE-Berlin), Berlin, pp. 29–30 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/iccebelin.2014.7034215
36. National Alliance for Health Information Technology Report to the Ofﬁce of the National
Coordinator for Health Information Technology on Deﬁning Key Health Information
Technology Terms, 28 April 2008

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
licence and indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder.

