CHAPTER 14

Using Biometric Sensors
to Measure Productivity
Marieke van Vugt, University of Groningen, The Netherlands

Operationalizing Productivity for Measurement
If we want to be productive, it would be great if we could track productivity in some way,
such that it is possible to determine what factors help and hinder productivity. Biometric
sensors may be helpful for such productivity tracking. But what does being productive
mean? A simplistic notion of productivity is being able to pay attention without getting
distracted. Indeed, to be productive in simple tasks such as filling out routine forms,
one needs to carefully monitor one’s goals and ensure not to get distracted. On the
other hand, for more complex tasks such as developing a new software architecture
or implementing a complex function, one also needs creativity and outside-the-­
box thinking, which is incompatible with a singular focus. In other words, aspects of
productivity such as creativity depend not on concentration but on its opposite: mind-­
wandering [1], which is a process of task-unrelated thinking. How would that work?
Mind-wandering, when it involves thinking about other things while you are engaged
in a task such as writing a computer program can help you to access new information
that brings an alternative perspective on what you are doing. This means that when the
contents of mind-wandering are monitored and are not too engrossing, it can in fact
be very useful. Moreover, this also means that a singular focus does not always indicate
productivity because, for example, being very concentrated on a single stupid task such
as writing the same line of code over and over again is not very productive.

© The Author(s) 2019
C. Sadowski and T. Zimmermann (eds.), Rethinking Productivity in Software Engineering,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-4221-6_14

159

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

In summary, productivity requires sometimes singular focus and sometimes
distraction. What is crucial is monitoring to ensure that attention is being paid to the
most relevant goals and that the degree of attentional focus is in line with those goals.
The attentional focus should be neither too narrow nor too wide and should be directed
to the task that is most important at that moment.
Interestingly, most current attempts at developing biometric sensors focus on
measuring attentional focus. Here I argue that another (albeit more technically
challenging) target could be the goal-directedness of attention. A goal-directed attention
is one that does not get pulled into patterns of thoughts that are difficult to disengage
from, such as, for example, rumination and worry.
In this chapter, I will first discuss biometric sensors on the basis of eye tracking
and electroencephalography (EEG) that simply track attention and then preview some
new potential sensors that track the broader definition of productivity that depends on
focusing on the most relevant goals and not being sidetracked by thoughts that pull one
away.

What the Eye Says About Focus
Arguably the simplest method to measure attention is by following the eye gaze and the
width of the pupil. In laboratory studies this is measured with fancy cameras that are
following the eyes, but potentially similar functions could be provided by webcams that
are present on almost every computer. In our lab we have demonstrated that webcam-­
based eye tracking is sensitive enough to predict upcoming choices from a set of stimuli
presented on the screen.
So, what can you measure with eye tracking? In one experiment investigating
distraction by external stimuli, we found that when we had a participant do a memory
task on the screen but showed cat videos on a flanking screen, their eyes were drawn to
the video [9]. The frequency with which the eyes were drawn to the cat video depended
on the difficulty of the task, such that the more visual resources a task consumed
(e.g., requiring poring over a visual image very precisely), the less likely a person was
distracted by the cat videos. On the other hand, the more memory resources a task
required (e.g., keeping in mind a series of numbers), the more likely the person’s eyes
were drawn to the cat videos. In other words, video screens with moving images are
a terrible idea on the work floor. In another study, we used eye tracking to examine
whether a person was keeping a location on the computer screen in mind that they were
160

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

trying to memorize [3]. We found that when they were distracted, as you would expect,
people’s eyes were less fixated on the visual locations than when they were attentive. In
short, when you are doing a task where your eyes have to be located at a specific spot
(such as a coding window that occupies only part of the screen), then using eye gaze can
be an effective measure of your attention.
However, most of the time, your work does not require your attention to be focused
on a single spot. In that case, potentially we could still use eye-based biosensors but
focus instead on the size of the pupil. Already for many decades, pupil size has been
associated with a state of mental effort [4] and arousal [2]. For example, when we make
the task more difficult, we tend to see an increase in pupil size. In addition, when we
reward people for successfully performing a difficult task, their pupil size increases even
more.
Many studies have associated mind-wandering with a decreased pupil size [3, 11],
so another potential marker for being on the ball and being productive would be the size
of your pupil. A larger pupil would be indicative of higher productivity. In fact, we have
previously used pupil size as a marker for when it would be best to interrupt the user [5].
Interruptions are generally best when a person is experiencing low workload, i.e., when
he or she is somewhere between subtasks, not when he or she is trying to remember
something or manipulate complex information in his mind. The study showed that we
were successful in finding low-workload moments and performance was better when we
interrupted on low-workload moments. This suggests that pupil size can successfully be
used even on a single-trial basis and is a good candidate for measuring mental effort as
an index of productivity.

Observing Attention with EEG
Another potential biomarker of productivity is EEG. EEG reflects the electrical activity
emitted by the brain, as measured by electrodes on the scalp. EEG has frequently been
used to track both mind-wandering and mental effort. A common finding is that when
a person is mind-wandering, the brain activity evoked by a stimulus is reduced. This
is thought to indicate a state in which the person is relatively disconnected from their
environment with their attention more internally directed. While there has been long-­
standing research in the role of alpha waves—which are typically referred to as the
brain’s “idling waves”—in mind-wandering, that research has not demonstrated clear
mappings between these brain waves and mind-wandering.
161

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

The most advanced studies in this field have started to use machine learning
classifiers to predict an individual’s attentional state. For example, a study by Mittner
and colleagues [6] demonstrated that it was possible to predict with almost 80
percent accuracy whether a person was on-task or mind-wandering on the basis of
a combination of behavioral and neural measures. These neural measures involved
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). The problem with fMRI is that it is not a
very suitable measure in an applied context because it requires an expensive and heavy
MRI scanner in which the person has to lie down to be scanned. Moreover, MRI scanners
produce a large amount of noise, making it not conducive for work. Nevertheless,
recent work in our lab suggests that it is possible to achieve up to 70 percent accuracy
in predicting mind-wandering using the more portable EEG. Moreover, in our study,
this accuracy was achieved across two different behavioral tasks, suggesting that it can
tap into a general mind-wandering measure, which is crucial for application in a work
environment.
EEG has been used to measure not only mind-wandering but also mental effort.
The most frequently used index of mental effort in EEG is the P3, an EEG potential that
occurs roughly 300 to 800 ms after a stimulus has been shown to an individual [10]. This
component is larger when a person exerts mental effort. This component is also smaller
when a person is mind-wandering, suggesting that the P3 is potentially not a very
unique index of mental effect. However, because this EEG component is time-locked
to a discrete stimulus, it may be challenging to monitor such potentials in the office
environment, unless you display periodic discrete stimuli to the individual with the
purpose of measuring this P3 potential.
Taking these concerns into account, if EEG is potentially usable for monitoring
distraction and productivity, then a problem to take into consideration is that despite
that it is less unwieldy than MRI, an EEG system is typically still quite inconvenient
and takes a lot of time to set up (usually somewhere between 15 and 45 minutes). A
research-grade EEG system consists of a fabric cap in which anywhere between 32 and
256 electrodes are embedded, and for each of these electrodes, the connection with the
scalp needs to be ascertained by means of an electrode gel and manual adjustments. On
top of that, the cap needs to be connected to an amplifier that enhances the weak signals
recorded on the scalp such that they are elevated above the noise. Only with these
procedures a sufficiently clean signal can be collected. Clearly this would not be feasible
for the workplace.

162

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

Luckily, recently there has been a boom in the development of low-cost EEG
devices that have only between 1 and 8 sensors and that do not need extensive
preparation (e.g., Emotiv and MUSE). If these electrodes were placed in the correct
locations, they could potentially serve as productivity-monitoring devices. In fact,
they are frequently marketed as devices that can record concentration. Despite these
claims, however, I have found that when comparing a research-grade EEG system to
these portable devices, that the portable EEG devices do not provide a reliable signal.
Many place electrodes on the forehead, which are primarily expected to capture
muscle activity instead of brain activity. Of course, muscle activity can be an index of
how stressed a person is, since stress is associated with muscle tension, but it does not
say much about a person’s mind-­wandering and distraction. For example, it is possible
to be quite tense while working on a software development project while being really
relaxed and browsing social media. So, at this time EEG is really only a useful measure
of productivity in a laboratory setting.

Measuring Rumination
As mentioned, only measuring focus is not sufficient for productivity. In addition,
a certain amount of mental flexibility and allocation of attention to relevant goals is
crucial. This mental flexibility is difficult to monitor with biometric devices, but one
related candidate signal is the one associated with “sticky mind-wandering”—a mind-­
wandering process that is very difficult to disengage from [12]. Sticky mind-wandering
is a precursor of rumination (narrowly focused uncontrolled repetitive thinking that
is mostly negatively balenced and self-referential [7]). For example, rumination may
involve repeated thinking that “I am worthless, I am a failure,” supplemented by recall
of experiences, such as a poor evaluation of a piece of work you delivered. This thinking
repeatedly intrudes into a person’s consciousness, thereby making it difficult for them
to concentrate, one of the major complaints that depressed people are suffering from.
Sticky mind-wandering can take the form of recurrent worries, for example, about not
being good enough, about their children, their future, and so on. These are the kinds of
thoughts that are particularly harmful for productivity because they disrupt particular
difficult thinking processes, which are crucial for software developers.

163

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

Recent work has started to map and experimentally manipulate these “sticky”
forms of mind-wandering. We found that when people have a thought that they think
is difficult to disengage from, then their task performance just prior to that moment
tends to be worse and more variable in duration [12]. Other research where people
were equipped with smart phones to measure their thoughts over the course of many
days showed that sticky mind-wandering interfered more with ongoing activities and
required more effort to inhibit. It was further suggested that a sticky form of mindwandering is associated with reduced heart-rate variability compared to nonsticky
mind-wandering [8]. In general, larger heart-rate variability is associated with increased
well-being, and therefore reduced heart-rate variability is not desirable. This means that
heart-rate variability is a potentially attractive target for biometric monitoring, especially
because more and more low-cost heart-rate trackers are becoming available, such as
those integrated in smart watches.

Moving Forward
The studies discussed here together suggest that there are several ways in which it
may be possible to measure productivity biometrically. Possibilities include pupil size,
heart-rate variability, and EEG, which each has its own possibilities and limitations.
Nevertheless, the majority of these measures were tested in a relatively simple and
artificial laboratory context, in which only a limited set of events can happen. In
contrast, in the real world, many more scenarios play out, and it is not clear how these
biometric measures fare in those contexts. What is needed is a better understanding
of the boundary conditions under which different biometric measures can work, and
potentially a combination of different measures can give a suitably accurate index of
distraction, thereby potentially differentiating between helpful mind-wandering and
harmful mind-wandering.
Such an index could potentially be integrated into an interception system that makes
the user aware of their distraction and then reminds them of their longer-term goals.
Distraction usually arises when goals with short-term rewards or instant rewards such as
social media are less active in our minds than longer-term goals. Even in the case of the
stickier ruminative mind-wandering, a small reminder may be enough to allow a person
to step out of this thought process and redirect attention to more productive long-term
goals such as writing a paper or finishing a computer program.

164

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

In short, I have discussed what it means to be productive and how we can
potentially measure this. Since most jobs require more than mechanical concentration
on a single thing, measurement of productivity is nontrivial. Nevertheless, scientific
studies on tracking attention provide a good starting point, and they demonstrate that
eye movements, pupil size, heart rate variability, and EEG all provide some useful
information about a person’s attentional state. On the other hand, none of these
measures by themselves provides a fool-proof metric of productivity. Moreover, in many
of them there are challenges to measuring it in a real-world context. For this reason, I
think that the most productive use of biometric monitoring is not tracking productivity
per se but rather helping the user to monitor himself or herself. The biometric sensors
could be combined and in this way could help a user to become aware of potential
lapses of productivity and remind them of their most important long-term goals.

Key Ideas
The following are the key ideas from this chapter:
•

While some forms of productivity require targeted attentional focus,
other forms of productivity require mental flexibility.

•

With eye tracking, we can follow whether a person is paying attention
and exert mental effort.

•

The EEG can also track attention but is difficult to measure with
mobile sensors.

•

Rumination is an important factor to consider in productivity.

References
[1] Baird, B., J. Smallwood, M. D. Mrazek, J. W. Y. Kam, M. J.
Frank, and J. W. Schooler. 2012. “Inspired by Distraction. Mind
Wandering Facilitates Creative Incubation.” Psychological Science
23 (10):1117–22. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797612446024.
[2] Gilzenrat, M. S., S. Nieuwenhuis, M. Jepma, and J. D. Cohen. 2010.
“Pupil Diameter Tracks Changes in Control State Predicted by the
Adaptive Gain Theory of Locus Coeruleus Function.” Cognitive,
Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience 10 (2):252–69.
165

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

[3] Huijser, S., M. K. van Vugt, and N. A. Taatgen. 2018. “The
Wandering Self: Tracking Distracting Self-Generated Thought in
a Cognitively Demanding Context.” Consciousness and Cognition
Consciousness & Cognition 58, 170-185.
[4] Kahneman, D., and J. Beatty. 1966. “Pupil Diameter and Load
on Memory.” Science 154 (3756). American Association for the
Advancement of Science:1583–5.
[5] Katidioti, Ioanna, Jelmer P Borst, Douwe J Bierens de Haan,
Tamara Pepping, Marieke K van Vugt, and Niels A Taatgen. 2016.
“Interrupted by Your Pupil: An Interruption Management System
Based on Pupil Dilation.” International Journal of Human–
Computer Interaction 32 (10). Taylor & Francis:791–801.
[6] Mittner, Matthias, Wouter Boekel, Adrienne M Tucker, Brandon
M Turner, Andrew Heathcote, and Birte U Forstmann. 2014.
“When the Brain Takes a Break: A Model-Based Analysis of
Mind Wandering.” The Journal of Neuroscience 34 (49). Soc
Neuroscience:16286–95.
[7] Nolen-Hoeksema, S., and J. Morrow. 1991. “A Prospective Study
of Depression and Posttraumatic Stress Symptoms After a
Natural Disaster: The 1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 61 (1):115–21.
[8] Ottaviani, C., B. Medea, A. Lonigro, M. Tarvainen, and
A. Couyoumdjian. 2015. “Cognitive Rigidity Is Mirrored by
Autonomic Inflexibility in Daily Life Perseverative Cognition.”
Biological Psychology 107. Elsevier:24–30.
[9] Taatgen, N. A, M. K. van Vugt, J. Daamen, I. Katidioti, and
J. P Borst. “The Resource- Availability Theory of Distraction and
Mind-Wandering.” (under review)
[10] Ullsperger, P, A-M Metz, and H-G Gille. 1988. “The P300
Component of the Event-­Related Brain Potential and Mental
Effort.” Ergonomics 31 (8). Taylor & Francis:1127–37.

166

Chapter 14

Using Biometric Sensors to Measure Productivity

[11] Unsworth, Nash, and Matthew K Robison. 2016. “Pupillary
Correlates of Lapses of Sustained Attention.” Cognitive, Affective, &
Behavioral Neuroscience 16 (4). Springer:601– 15.
[12] van Vugt, M. K., and N. Broers. 2016. “Self-Reported Stickiness
of Mind-Wandering Affects Task Performance.” Frontiers in
Psychology 7. Frontiers Media SA:732.

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits any
noncommercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format,
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if you modified the licensed material.
You do not have permission under this license to share adapted material derived from
this chapter or parts of it.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need
to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

167

