Neural Computing and Applications
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-020-05247-1

(0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789().
,- volV)

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

SaS-BCI: a new strategy to predict image memorability and use mental
imagery as a brain-based biometric authentication
Fares Youseﬁ1

•

Hoshang Kolivand1 • Thar Baker1

Received: 11 February 2020 / Accepted: 24 July 2020
Ó The Author(s) 2020

Abstract
Security authentication is one of the most important levels of information security. Nowadays, human biometric techniques
are the most secure methods for authentication purposes that cover the problems of older types of authentication like
passwords and pins. There are many advantages of recent biometrics in terms of security; however, they still have some
disadvantages. Progresses in technology made some specific devices, which make it possible to copy and make a fake
human biometric because they are all visible and touchable. According to this matter, there is a need for a new biometric to
cover the issues of other types. Brainwave is human data, which uses them as a new type of security authentication that has
engaged many researchers. There are some research and experiments, which are investigating and testing EEG signals to
find the uniqueness of human brainwave. Some researchers achieved high accuracy rates in this area by applying different
signal acquisition techniques, feature extraction and classifications using Brain–Computer Interface (BCI). One of the
important parts of any BCI processes is the way that brainwaves could be acquired and recorded. A new Signal Acquisition
Strategy is presented in this paper for the process of authorization and authentication of brain signals specifically. This is to
predict image memorability from the user’s brain to use mental imagery as a visualization pattern for security authentication. Therefore, users can authenticate themselves with visualizing a specific picture in their minds. In conclusion, we
can see that brainwaves can be different according to the mental tasks, which it would make it harder using them for
authentication process. There are many signal acquisition strategies and signal processing for brain-based authentication
that by using the right methods, a higher level of accuracy rate could be achieved which is suitable for using brain signal as
another biometric security authentication.
Keywords Brain–Computer Interface  Biometric authentication  EEG  Signal acquisition

1 Introduction
For many years, authentication technology plays a crucial
role in terms of data security. The authentication process is
to determine whether someone or something is, who or
what it declares itself to be. Biometric authentications are
the most secure methods that we are using nowadays.
Besides all of the great advantages of the recent biometric
& Fares Yousefi
f.yousefi@2017.ljmu.ac.uk
Thar Baker
t.baker@ljmu.ac.uk
1

Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering
and Technology Liverpool, John Moores University (LJMU),
Liverpool L3 3AF, UK

methods, they still have some weaknesses and issues [1]
which brainwave authentication can cover those.
Brain-based authentication is getting very popular in
researcher’s works recently. Brainwave can be the most
secure biometric authentication, as it does not have some
issues and disadvantages, which other biometric techniques
have. In terms of security, brainwaves can have a higher
level of security as it is not visible to duplicate and the ID
pattern would be changeable.
There are many research experiments, which used
electroencephalography (EEG) to test brainwaves for
authentication purposes using Brain–Computer Interface
(BCI). Every BCI process has three important parts
including signal acquisition, feature extraction and classification. This process would be different regards to the
main goal of using human brainwaves. For example, using

123

Neural Computing and Applications

BCI for authentication purposes needs specific ways of the
main three parts of the BCI process. Every part can have a
big effect on the results.
There are many researches, which have used different
methods of signal acquisition, extracting the specific features and classification techniques. According to the
weakness of the human brains, which are a type of electromagnetic waves, and the devices that we are using to
record them at the time that this paper is written, we need
to use special techniques for signal recording for any
specific purposes to achieve the best results.
This paper is presenting a new brainwave acquisition
strategy that is specifically for brain-based authorization
and authentication by predicting picture memorability,
which through that, users can register their brain-ID to the
database, authorize themselves and pass the authentication
security by using a unique visualization pattern in their
mind. Many different patterns have been used by
researchers including relaxation [2], muscle movements
[3], visualizing [4], breathing and sport activity [5], Rapid
Serial Visual Representation (RSVP) [6], pass-thoughts [7]
and many others. Mental imagery and picturizing pattern
using Signal Acquisition Strategy, which is presented in
this paper, can be the most secure brain-ID pattern, in
which this research is concentrated on it specifically.
The remainder of this work is organized as follows: (1)
Related existing brain-based authentication methods using
different brain-based paradigms. (2) The proposed signal
acquisition strategy. (3) The process of preprocessing,
feature extraction and classification. (4) The experiment’s
results and evaluation. (5) Finally, conclusion the experimentation according to the presented approach.

1.1 Literature background and related works
Current research in this area can be categorized as Biometrics, Brain–Computer Interface and Brain-Based
Authentication. The majority of the recent research in these
years shows that brain wave is a biometric characteristic
that is unique and inherent in every person, but there are
still some limitations which need to be covered by more
research to have better results and the highest accuracy
rates to use brain signal as a new biometric authentication.

1.2 Biometrics
There are two different concepts in biometrics that we
should concentrate on them, which are Behavioral/Physical
Biometrics and Authentication/Identification. Behavioral
Biometrics focuses on studying the non-biological or nonphysiological structures of human body. It considers the
uniqueness of human behavioral characteristics like voice,
signature, keystrokes and gait. Physical Biometric is

123

focusing on analyzing the biological and physiological
characteristics of human body [8]. In terms of security and
usability, biometric authentication is one of the most wellknown approaches because of the uniqueness of some
specific features. These features are so hard to duplicate
and accurately produce. However, for security purposes,
physiological traits are more practical. The most commonly used physiological biometrics are face detection,
fingerprint identification and iris/retina scan. Table 1
shows some important advantages and disadvantages of
these methods.
On the other hand, the potential of using brainwaves as a
new biometric identification has risen recently. However, it
needs more time and doing more experiments before
becoming a method of security.
Neural oscillations, or brainwaves, are an essential
mechanism to enable the synchronization of neural activity
inside and around brain areas and helps the accurate temporal organization of neural processes underlying memory,
cognition, behavior and perception [9].
Electroencephalography (EEG) is an electrophysiological observing method to acquire electrical activities generated by human brain using electrodes placed on the
surface of the scalp [10]. It is an excellent tool for studying
the processes of neurocognitive underlying person behavior
because of some reasons, for example, (1) EEG has very
high time resolution and captures cognitive processes in the
time frame in which cognition occurs. (2) EEG directly
measures neural activity. (3) EEG is inexpensive, lightweight and portable. (4) EEG monitors cognitive-affective
processing in the absence of behavioral responses [11]. In
terms of frequency, we all have five types of brainwave
(Gamma, Beta, Alpha, Theta, Delta) and ‘‘each frequency
is measured in cycles per second (Hz) and has its own set
of characteristics representing a specific level of brain
activity and a unique state of consciousness’’ [12]. This is
represented in Table 2.

1.3 Brain–Computer Interface (BCI)
BCI technology is a communication process for both users
and systems. To complete a communication, no external
devices or muscle involvement is needed to issue instructions [13]. The BCI can be separated into invasive, partially
invasive and non-invasive types [14]. In invasive BCI,
recording the signals occurs when electrodes enter brain
tissue by surgery. In partially invasive BCI, electrodes are
placed inside of the skull on the gray matter over the surface and it needs surgery. In a non-invasive BCI, no need to
do any surgery. Instead, the electrodes are placed over the
head like a hat or a headset.
A BCI process has five sequential stages: signal acquisition, preprocessing or signal enhancement, feature

Neural Computing and Applications
Table 1 Typical biometric methods advantages and disadvantages [1]
Biometric advantages and disadvantages
Advantages

Disadvantages

Security: Biometric technology brings different types of solutions,
which are nearly impossible to hack unlike passwords

Physical traits are not changeable: We can reset a password, but we
never can change our fingerprints or retina; these are fixed

Accuracy: Biometric works with individual’s physical traits such as
fingerprints, face, retina among others that will always serve you
accurately anywhere, anytime

Error rate: Usually, biometric devices make two types of errors, False
Acceptance Rate (FAR) and False Rejection Rate (FRR). When the
device accepts an unauthorized person, it is known as FAR, and when
it rejects an authorized person, it is known as FRR

Convenient: Your credentials are with you forever, so it does not
require you to memorize or note down anything

Delay: Some biometric devices take more than the accepted time and a
long queue of workers form waiting to be enrolled in large companies

Flexibility: You have your own security credentials with you so you
do not need to bother memorizing awkward alphabets, numbers and
symbols required for creating a complex password

Unhygienic: In contact-based biometric techniques, a biometric device
is used a lot times by enormous amount of people. Everyone is
actually sharing his or her germs with each other via the device

Trustable: Reports claim that the young generations trust biometric
solutions more than other solutions

Physical disability: Some people are not fortunate enough to be able
to participate in the enrollment process. They might have lost or
damaged body parts such as fingers or eyes

Scalability: Unlike other solutions, biometrics are highly scalable
solutions for all types of projects. It is possible for any kinds of
projects because of the scalability of its solutions

Environment and usage matters: Environment and usage can affect
the overall measurements taken

Save time: Biometric solutions are highly time conserving
Save money: With a little money, any company can track their
employees and reduce the extra costs they are paying for years

Table 2 Types of brainwaves and their frequency rates and mental state situation [1]
Wave

Frequency

Mental state

Gamma

Above 40 Hz

Thinking, integrated thought

Beta

13–40 Hz.

Alertness, focused, integrated, thinking, agitation, aware of self and surroundings

Alpha

8–12 Hz.

Relaxed, non-agitated, conscious state of mind

Theta

4–7 Hz

Intuitive, creative, recall, fantasy, dreamlike, drowsy and knowing

Delta

0.1–4 Hz

Deep, dreamless sleep, trance and unconscious

extraction, classification and the application interface. In
this process, the signal acquisition stage is a considerable
challenge. According to the user strategy, signals will be
acquired from the user’s brain. In general, there would be
some artifacts and noises in the recorded brain such as
blinks, eye movements and heartbeat.
For this matter, a couple of different methods are presented by different studies for artifact removal. These
techniques have specific purposes that could match each
objective of experiments conducted [15]. After preprocessing and filtering, the EEG signals will pass through the
feature extraction process and select particular features by
some feature selection methods. In most existing BCI, the
identification process relies on a classification algorithm.

These procedures are used to identify ‘‘patterns’’ of brain
activity [16]. Classification algorithms are divided into five
different categories: linear classifiers, neural networks,
nonlinear Bayesian classifiers, nearest neighbor classifiers
and combinations of classifiers [17].

1.4 Brain-based authentication
Currently, biometrics, such as voice, fingerprint, iris, face,
have been widely studied, especially in real-life situations.
But, there are some weaknesses in these biometrics [18].
For example, fingerprints can be replicated through latex
milk, plastic mold and wood glue [19]; a fingerprint made
by a 2D picture from a normal printer [20]; high-resolution

123

Neural Computing and Applications

photography [21]. Face, fingerprints, retina and iris are all
non-cancellable. This means that they cannot be replaced
and a new eye or finger cannot be grown again or face
volitionally cannot be changed. We need a biometric more
secure than any of these, which would be more difficult to
replicate, and it would be cancellable. Brain electrical
activity may meet these criteria.
There are a couple of unique advantages in EEG compared to other biometrics methods. First, to record EEG,
the person must be alive [22]. Fingerprint and face can be
maintained even from a dead human body, or the iris, after
death, is still valid for recognition for a few hours after
death [23]. According to this matter, the user has to be alive
and in a conscious state to produce EEG data. Second,
brain signal voltage will fall off dramatically with distance
from the brain.
Despite the many advantages of brain-based biometric,
it is still not extensively adopted because considerable
research still must be done. There are seven factors to
evaluate the reasonability of using a biometric for security
purposes including universality, uniqueness, collectability,
permanence, performance, acceptability and circumvention
[24].
Table 3 compares five biometrics including brainwaves
in terms of the seven factors mentioned [18].
Recently, scientists and researchers have been doing
many attempts to observing the pattern uniqueness of the
brain signal. Several different methods have been used to
analyze EEG signals.
In regard to the recent progression of EEG signal
acquisition devices, the capability of providing better
results is going higher and these processes are getting
simpler. Some studies in this research area were reported
good results with higher accuracy rates in their experiences
[25]. These studies used different methods of BCI process
for signal acquisition, feature extraction and classification
on brainwaves to use them for authentication purposes.
An authentication system proposed by Riera et al. [26]
was using a combination of ECG and EEG signals for
discriminating against the situation. The achieved accuracy
for this study was higher than others even for relaxation
task. This is due to the added ECG channel. A different

approach proposed by Jayarathne et al. [27] tested the
possibility of person authentication by thinking about a
specific number. Yeom et al. [28] presented a method to
extract unique signals using ‘‘self- and non-self’’ face
pictures. In response to self-face, each subject has its own
characteristics, so EEG patterns must be unique in regard
to this subject.
Chen et al. [6], proposed an authentication system using
Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP) stimulus. Linear
Discriminant Analysis (LDA) was used to classify EEG
signals obtained by a brain amplifier. The important features are calculated using a particular association constant.
According to the author’s notation, a password can be
hidden effectively in certain compulsive situations.
Chuang et al. [29] presented a new approach which used
the MindWave to obtain data. Seven tasks were executed,
including sports activity, breathing, audio listing, simulation of finger movement, color, reciting and identifying
music with singing, and pass-thoughts. The classification
process is done with the k-nearest neighbor (k- NN)
algorithm. The most accurate strategies were for color,
audio and sport. The most difficult one was for the passthought task according to the results of the questionnaire
that determined for user-friendliness with different tasks.
Breathing, audio and color were the straightforward tasks.
La Rocca et al. [2] presented an approach centered
around connectivity within EEG spectral coherence. In this
method, data samples were gathered from 108 participants
during open resting and closed eyes positions. EEG data
were captured using a system consisting of 64 different
channels with a rate of 160 Hz. Data were filtered to 50 Hz
via a low-pass anti-aliasing filter. Spectral coherence
(COH) and power spectral density (PSD) analysis techniques were used to extract mental features. To calculate
uniqueness, two different algorithms were used separately
in this process which was Mahalanobis classifiers that were
based on distance and match score fusion system. This
technique is strong and very accurate for user identification. The performance of classification has the possibility
of not functioning properly if this classification was used
for a larger group of users on traditional hardware and it is
less than 100%.

Table 3 Comparison of some biometrics with brainwave biometrics
Biometric identifier

Universality

Uniqueness

Permanence

Collectability

Performance

Accessibility

Circumvention

DNA

H

H

H

L

H

L

L

Face

H

L

M

H

L

H

H

Fingerprint

M

H

H

M

H

M

M

Iris

H

H

H

M

H

L

L

Brainwave

H

H

H

M

H

M

H

123

Neural Computing and Applications

Ruiz-Blondet et al. [30] presented a protocol known as
CEREBRE with a band-pass filtering between 1 and 55 Hz,
and based on normalized cross-correlation, a simple discriminant function was used for classification. The nominal
(4 categories, 3 channels) classifier showed the highest
accuracy when all the patterns were used, but both maximum and minimum classifiers showed 100% accuracy. The
results presented that the most accuracy was for the stimulus oddball and food. The resting pattern had reduced
performance in terms of classification. Authentication
centered on a memory-evoking task (also known as ‘‘passthoughts’’ in other studies) [31] also showed weak results
too; this is due to the inconstant time that was consumed to
allow thinking.

1.5 Mental visualization
There are three groups of protocols used for recording EEG
in general: mental tasks, resting states and tasks with an
external stimulus. Choosing each protocol can influence the
procedure of authentication and the accuracy. For instance,
for mental tasks or the resting states an EEG recording
device is required, while external stimuli tasks need devices to make the appropriate stimulation. Then again, resting states tasks can be effortlessly influenced by artifacts
and noisy environment, while a higher ‘‘signal-to-noise
ratio’’ (SNR) can be seen in tasks followed by external
stimuli and mental tasks. This can be accomplished by
recognizing ‘‘Event-Related Potential’’ (ERP) [32]. For
example, to observe the ERP reactions to the visual stimuli,
the visual cortex, occipital lobe and central region are
engaging.
According to this and with some compromising, the
number electrodes that have been utilized in this study to
record brain signals have been reduced. Many different
mental tasks have been tested and good results achieved.
However, most of them are very complex and time-consuming for authentication process. Tasks like: imagine
some physical body movements [33], counting numbers in
mind, sing a song, and focus on a desired thought [29],
imagining the movement of a given geometric shape
around an axis [34] and some other sets of mental tasks that
individuals are asked to perform.
It is shown that better results have been achieved from
imaginary tasks and protocols in comparison with the
physical ones. On the other hand, a popular theory called
‘‘dual coding’’ [35] showed that graphical substances such
as images, shapes or pictures are easier to remember in
comparison with the number, words and sequences. Basically, this theory explains that these types of objects are
determined (memorized) with 2 particular codes (verbal
and pictorial), whereas a number sequence or a word is
determined by a single verbal code. It has been

recommended in a study that despite the fact that photographs and words share indistinguishable semantic
meaning, pictures are easier to remember and more memorable because they have more particular codes than words
[36]. Many studies concluded in their results that words are
more memorable than numbers, and graphical patterns,
shapes and images are more memorable than words. These
progresses reached out to the long-term memories as
appropriate as the short-term memories. Mental imagery or
colloquially ‘‘visualizing,’’ ‘‘seeing in the mind’s eye,’’
‘‘hearing in the head,’’ ‘‘imagining the feel of’’ resembles
imaginary experience, but happens in the lack of the real
external stimuli. Mental images are always pictures of
something or other which appears in mind and by this
means functioning as a form of mental picture [37]. Some
research has shown that visual mental imagery is in control
of frontal–parietal regions and can rely on occipital–temporal regions of the brain.
In a memory test experience, participants responded ‘‘remember,’’ ‘‘know’’ or ‘‘new.’’ ‘‘In the imagery test, participants responded ‘‘high vividness,’’ ‘‘moderate vividness,’’ or
‘‘low vividness.’’ Visual memory (old-remember) and visual
imagery (old-high vividness) were commonly associated with
activity in frontal–parietal control regions and occipital–
temporal sensory regions. In addition, ‘‘visual memory produced greater activity than visual imagery in parietal and
occipital–temporal regions’’ [38].
According to the literature, pictures and shapes can be
easier to memorize and choosing a good authorization
paradigm could be very important for authentication purposes. Therefore, we decided to concentrate on mental
imagery and picturizing pattern using a picture as a brainID, which in this study 2 different types of pictures (2D
geometric shapes and 3D real pictures) have been tested by
the proposed method to predict image memorability.
A new algorithm is designed to acquire the brain signal.
Therefore, the simple types of images that can be
remembered and recalled could be an appropriate brainbased paradigm for authorization and authentication
processes.

2 SaS-BCI
SaS is for Signal Acquisition Strategy, which is for a user
to register the unique brain signal on an application or
device and use it as an authentication method.
SaS-BCI is divided into 4 stages as follows:

123

Neural Computing and Applications

Stage 1: Users looking at a specific picture and memorise it in their mind
Stage 2: Users visualise that specific picture in their mind
User Strategy = Looking at a Specific Picture + Memorising
User Brain ID = User’s Unique Brainwave Made by Visualising the Specific Picture

Stage 3: The brain signal will be recorded in a database as a user ID.
Stage 4: Users can authorise themselves by visualising the same specific picture
in their minds.
Authentication Method = Receive the User Brain ID + Comparing to the Recorded ID in Database

The proposed method is divided into three stages: The
first stage is to record EEG signals obtained from human
participants (User ID). In the next stage, these signals will
be preprocessed using the notch filter method, band-pass
filter in the range of 0.5–7 Hz, noise removal for then eye
blink and normalization. The last stage will be classifying
the data and then achieving the accuracy of the method for
the authentication purposes (Fig. 1).
In this study, the acquired data are divided into three
portions: training data, cross-validation data and testing.
The training data are utilized to ensure the machine perceives image paradigms in the data, and the cross-validation data are utilized to guarantee the effectiveness of the
used algorithm and a better accuracy for the trained model.

Fig. 1 New Signal Acquisition Strategy using Brain–Computer Interface

123

At the end, the test data are utilized to perceive how well
the images can be predicted based on its training.
This process has been done on three mental tasks in
particular; for looking at a white wall, looking at pictures
and imagining (visualizing) the pictures in mind. A dataset
is provided that contains historical data from which to learn
patterns. It needs the outcomes to determine the features
that best predict the outcomes. However, the main purpose
of this study is testing the visualizing paradigm and predicting the pictures by recalling them.
We experimented to investigate if brain signal can be
used to predict image recall. EEG data were collected from
users by seeing and picturizing different pictures. Users
were then asked to imagine the pictures from the two
categories alternatively; they saw and kept in their

Neural Computing and Applications

memories. They were then asked to reimagine the pictures
they memorized.

2.1 Step 1: data acquisition
To acquiring the signals, we used a special subject strategy,
a non-invasive BCI device (14 channels Emotiv Epoc ?)
[39], a Laptop and Emotiv SDK Pro software to record the
signals, digitize and make them ready for the other
processes.
The EEG data were acquired from twenty healthy participants between 15 and 45 years old. Each participant sat
in front of a white wall for 15–30 min.
The EEG data of each participant were recorded in two
sessions and three different situations: First, watching at
the white wall. Second, watching at a specific picture
(printed on an A4 size paper). And the last one, visualizing
or imagining the same picture in their mind while they
were watching the white wall with open eyes and naming
the pictures they could remember. Twenty different pictures were showed to each participants, ten easy to
remember 2D single color objects with white background
and ten hard to remember real object photos with more
details. In the first session, the data were recorded from
each position of the participants for 10s per picture. The
second session had just one position, which was recalling
the memorized pictures from the previous session (visualizing or imagining). It was in the same place, and the same
situation and participants have been asked to do the
imagination position when they were watching at the white
wall and recalling the pictures by naming them. The data
were recorded similar to the first session for each participants. Measurements were taken by Emotiv device from
the 14 channels that were placed on the participant’s scalp.
All channels were sampled at 250 Hz. You can see three
different positions in two sessions have been exerted as
user strategy for signal acquisition part of the project
(Fig. 2).

2.2 Step 2: preprocessing (enhancement)
EEGLAB and BCILAB MATLAB toolboxes were used to
process the data. These toolboxes are for the prototyping,
designing, experimentation, testing and evaluation of
Brain–Computer Interfaces; the raw EEG data need to be
processed to obtain specific features and use it to train the
model.
Signal filtering can significantly improve the visibility of
a defect signal. Figure 3 shows the EEG data, which are
recorded from one participant. In the mentioned figure, you
can see that each colored bit signifies the spectrum of the
activity of one data channel. For example, the leftmost
scalp map shows the scalp distribution of power at 6 Hz.

The other scalp maps indicate the distribution of power at
10, 16, 22 and 60 Hz. Plotting channel spectra and mapping computed the specific time windows in the data. Each
channel has a colored line, which shows their signal
characteristics. The characteristics and the distances
between each of the lines show that these data need to be
filtered and reject artifact to be analyzed in the further
works.
Filtering the continuous EEG data reduces the outline of
filtering artifacts at epoch boundaries. A high-pass filter is
often necessary to remove linear trends of the data. The
reason for using the high-pass filter is removing slow and
possibly large amplitude drifts in the signals. In this case, a
basic Finite Impulse Response (FIR) filtering technique
[40] is used for high-pass filtering. For the lower edge of
the frequency passband and the higher edge of the frequency, passband 0.5 Hz and 50 Hz exerted, respectively.
The amount of 0.5 Hz for lower edge band-pass means
everything below that frequency will be removed which is
needed for Independent Component Analysis (ICA) analysis that will be exerted in the next step. This analysis
algorithm is very sensitive to the lower shift frequencies.
Figure 4 shows the filter response after filtering for the
same channel. You can see that it filtered everything lower
than 0.5 Hz passband and everything above 50 Hz passband and it removed sharp line noises. This filtering
method is doing the both forward and backward phase
shifts on the signals.
The EEG signals contain artifacts in preparation. There
are two different kinds of artifacts: external and internal
which are unwanted noises in a signal. Outer actions are
external artifacts, and the actions made by the subject itself
are internal artifacts. On the other hand, sometimes some
EEG channels are not working properly for several reasons.
In EEG, sometimes to record anything interesting, the
quality of the connection between the electrode and the
scalp is too low. It is important to identify the sensors with
weak signal quality because the artifact removal will be
more efficient. Removing cardiac and blink artifacts with
some bad channels may not work fine, and worse; it will
spread the bad signals to all the channels [41]. All channels
checked and the bad channels rejected from the data to
make it ready for ICA process to reject large artifacts.
The amplitude of artifacts is often larger than the
amplitude of the brain data, which potentially decrease the
signal/noise ratio, bias data analysis and potential results.
Many types of the artifact are visible and easy to find
with eyes in EEG data such as eye movements, muscle
movements, high noises, linear trends and discontinuity.
All of the 14 channels of EEG data checked and the bad
channels identified and removed. ‘‘Independent component
analysis (ICA) aims to solve the problem of signals separation from their linear mixture. ICA is a special case of

123

Neural Computing and Applications

Fig. 2 User strategies and signal acquisition from the participants in two sessions
Fig. 3 Plotting channel spectra
and map

blind source separation when separation is performed
without the aid of information (or with very little information) about the source signals or the process of signal
mixing’’ [42]. ICA is excellent for identifying and
removing blink artifacts because they are large in amplitude, have a discrete source and are extremely reliable from
blink to blink. ICA algorithm applied on the EEG data in
EEGLab tool. According to the volume of EEG data, the
ICA process took a significant time to complete.

123

2.3 Step 3: feature extraction
This study extracted feature arrays from the EEG signals
using PSD method. This was done to surge the effectiveness due to a larger number of data points and potential
connections between channels across the whole brain.
Therefore, it is a significant process in interpreting an input
signal to use it as an authentication key.
Power Spectral Density (PSD) displays that different
mental tasks have different frequency ranges with different

Neural Computing and Applications

Fig. 4 Left: The original activity power spectrum in frequency. Right: The filtered data with high-pass filter technique

under the measure. Fu is stated as a feature from the
concavity of power spectral distribution. In the alpha band,
a feature has been adopted from a power spectral variance
that expects the spectrum which signifies the increase in
spectral distribution (2)
N  2
X
Fu ¼
fju
ð1Þ
j¼1

r2 ¼

Fig. 5 Illustration of the concavity of spectral definition

powers. It defines the power distribution of a signal over
frequency [43]. Fourier Transform (FT) [44] was exerted to
convert the EEG signal from the time domain into the
frequency domain.
PSD obtained over squaring of the total value of Fourier
transformed data per segment. Based on that, the nondominant region of the power spectrum [45] and the concavity of spectral distribution [46] variance of spectral
power were considered as EEG features for recognition
purpose.
After spotting the maximum level of the power spectrum, its tenth part was calculated and implemented as a
measure. You can see the definition of this
process in Fig. 5.
The frequencies values of power spectral that were
under the calculated measure were squared and then summed (1) where fju ðj ¼ 1; 2; ; 3; . . .; N Þ is frequency values

L
1X
ðpk  pÞ2
L k¼1

ð2Þ

where power spectral values are pk ðk ¼ 1; 2; 3; . . .; LÞ
 To distinguish
and the mean value the alpha band is p.
individuals, the convexity of power spectral can be another
key feature, which is defined as follows:
In the alpha band, the spectral values have been ranked,
and afterward, the frequencies of the top three values were
averaged, respectively. This procedure is shown as (I)
in Fig. 6. Here, the top three power spectral values and the
frequencies are p1 ; p2 ; p3 and f1 ; f2 ; f3 , respectively, which
their mean values are given by (3)(4)
p1 þ p2 þ p3
Pm ¼
ð3Þ
3
f1 þ f2 þ f3
Fm ¼
ð4Þ
3
As shown in Fig. 6(II), the power spectral values that
are bigger than the mean are
fig ði ¼ 1; 2; 3; . . .; M Þ and their summation is the following equation:
Fg ¼

M
X

fig

ð5Þ

i¼1

123

Neural Computing and Applications

Fig. 6 Process of the convexity of power spectral for frequencies and power spectral values

In this study, Fm ; Pm ; Fg from the convexity in power
spectral distribution are extracted as features. The spectral
analysis showed the frequency bands in which amplitude
was different between the tasks and normal situation and
specially the differences between each tasks and participants. Based on the classification method using MATLAB
software, we used the extracted feature obtained using this
technique.

2.4 Step 4: classification
Classification process was performed based on whether the
mental imagery was successfully recalled or not using
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) and Support Vector
Machine (SVM) classifiers separately. At this stage, a
choice of good discriminative features is very important for
getting a better classification result that influences the
project’s intentions. Because of different environments and
different experiment settings, there is no particular method
to compare the results between different methods.
LDA and SVM techniques are fast and less complex
which makes them to be a good option specifically for
authentication processes. LDA is often considered good for
real-time BCIs because of its simplicity, speed of execution
and low computational cost.
SVM works generally well depending on a clear margin
of distinguishing two classes. It will be more efficient in
spaces with high dimensions. It is fairly memory efficient.
The main classification technique for this study is SVM
method. LDA has been used separately to check the possible differences in results and accuracy rates.
Recently, SVM and Neural Networks (NN) methods
[47], [48] are the most commonly used techniques in EEG

123

authentication studies. However, in a simple
way, SVM without kernel is a single neuron inside neural
networks, nevertheless with diverse cost function. By
adding a kernel function, it will be comparable with two
layer NNs. Actually, in terms of the model performance,
SVMs are sometimes equivalent to a shallow neural network architecture [49, 50]. Generally, a NN will outperform an SVM when there is a large amount of data.
However, many factors such as preprocessing, feature
extraction and classification stage are the most important
part of any BCI applications processes, which has highly
influences on accuracy rate. Therefore, LDA and SVM
classification methods have been used to see the differences and compare the results. But the main classifier for
the aim of the project is SVM.
LDA is one of the most well-known data reduction
methods. By utilizing this procedure, the hyperplanes are
employed to distinguish the data from various classes. In
this process, LDA expects normal distribution of the data,
with equivalent covariance framework for the two classes.
The distinguishing hyperplane was gotten by looking for
the estimate that maximizes the separation between the
means of the two classes and limiting the interclass variance. For an N-class issue (N [ 2), a number of hyperplanes are utilized in the process. Here, the following
equation [51] can define it, which is expanded over every
linear projections, w:
jm1  m2 j
J ðwÞ ¼

S21 þ S22

2
ð6Þ

In Eq. (6), S represents a variance, m represents the
mean, and the subscripts signify the two classes [52]. LDA

Neural Computing and Applications

technique is used by MATLAB software to find a linear
transformation that discriminates between different classes.
Support Vector Machine (SVM) is a classification
technique that creates a hyperplane that separates the
dataset into classes dependent on kernel functions on a
feature space with two dimensions [53] as shown in Fig. 7.
(xi ), which is the training data belonged to two separated
classes (yi ), (7) represented with the optimal hyperplane (8)
fxi ; yi g; i ¼ 1; 2; 3; . . .; N; yi 2 f1; þ1g; xi 2 Rn ;

ð7Þ

ðw:xi Þ þ b ¼ 0;

ð8Þ

In this study, the SVM technique selected the optimal
hyperplane with the biggest margin using Eq. (9) and (10),
which is equivalent to Eq. (11).
xi :w þ b  þ 1foryi ¼ þ1

ð9Þ

ð10Þ
xi :w þ b  þ 1foryi ¼ 1
 T


w uðxi Þ þ b  þ 1; ifyi ¼ þ1
! yi wT uðxi Þ þ b  1
wT uðxi Þ þ b   1; ifyi ¼ 1
ð11Þ
The u() function maps the input space into a greater
dimensional space. Support vectors are the closest training
data samples to the hyperplane.
SVM classification technique was performed using
tenfold cross-validation to find out if the EEG signals
formed with a picture presenting can be used to predict that
image’s comprehended memorability. This classification
process has been performed based on two labels of least
memorable images and most memorable images according
to correctly and incorrectly recalled.

3 Results
The total recorded EEg data are divided into three categories for each user position. Three PSD feature vectors are
created and classified by SVM and LDA classifiers.
Table 4 shows the average acquired accuracy rate for the
pictures recalled from 20 participants. These percentages
are by image category per user.
The results showed that the visualization of the image
could be considered as secure brain-based paradigm or
Brain-ID for authentication.
According to the results, there might be many reasons
that are producing the EEG signals to be higher for the
image that was successfully recalled later. For instance, as
identified by the BCI, the increase in mental activities
could be credited to the user trying to mentally pronounce
the image name.
2D object images with higher EEG amplitudes had a
higher chance of being recalled real object images with
lower amplitudes.
It is significant here that there may be various reasons
that are causing the EEG signals to be higher for the images
that were successfully recalled later. For instance, as
identified by the BCI the ascent in mental activities could
be recognized to the user to name the image mentally.

Table 4 Image recall success percentage for both 2D and real object
pictures
User ID

2D object (%)

Real object (%)

1

100

65

2

100

63

3

98

54

4

98

30

5

98

65

6

98

23

7

92

58

8
9

98
96

30
11

10

98

45

11

98

65

12

100

54

13

94

18

14

100

21

15

98

45

16

98

33

17

100

61

18

94

15

19

100

18

20

100

38

Fig. 7 Fundamental idea of linear SVM characterized by the optimal
hyperplane

123

Neural Computing and Applications

Another explanation behind this ascent could be that the
image is causing a mental imagery.
It shows that real object pictures are harder to remember
and recall. The 2D object pictures are having a much
higher successful recall (98%) than the real object pictures
(41%). The recall differences between individuals can be
noticed when it comes to real object pictures. About 60%
success rate achieved for a quarter of the users for recalling
the real object images. SVM classifier has been used to
predict image recall. The data used in this experiment are
for both successfully and unsuccessfully recalled images
averaged over the 14 channels per user.
These data were used for feature extraction and selection
in the domains deliberated earlier. The performance of the
classifiers based on the extracted feature sets is shown in
Table 5.
The PSD resulted in an average rate of 88% accuracy
with 0.93 of AUC by SVM classifier and an average rate of
88% accuracy with 0.92 of AUC by LDA classifier. It is
important to mention that the image recall’s prediction
achieved in this experiment is only from the short-term
memory, and the results could be different for long-term
memory. This study specifically concentrated on the pictures that users were asked to memorize in their minds. It
provides an understanding into how the brain observes
images with different characteristics and helps provide a
significant improvement for mental imagery security while
recognizing the human unique feature in the system.
Most of the researchers reported that a higher accuracy
rates can be achieved with more complex tasks [3, 6, 30],
but complex tasks make the system less practical, because
both processes of system training and authentication would
be very time-consuming. In regard to this matter, the presented authentication method with the SaS brain-based
paradigm is simpler and faster in comparison with the other
methods in different studies. Table 6 shows a comparison
between this research and two other studies for brain-based
authentication. The accuracy of the presented method is
88% which is lower than Gui et al. [54] with 90% accuracy.
Although it is less than Gui et al. results, the authentication method that used in the proposed study is simpler
and less complex than Gui et al. Higher accuracy can be
achieved by combining several extracted features, but the
classification takes a long time to process and it makes the
experiment more complex. Task complexity makes the
computational cost higher, and it is more time-consuming

Table 5 Performance of image
recalled vs not recalled by two
different classifiers including
SVM & LDA

123

which makes the authentication process slow and less
practical.
Using more subjects rises the accuracy rate of classification methods. It is confirmed by Chen et al. [6] with
execution multi- and single-trial classification. Using fewer
subjects delivers a better accuracy rate than exerting more
subjects; therefore, the similar ones can be found in a
bigger set [2]. According to this matter, approaches, which
demonstrate high accuracies with small numbers of subjects, might not represent a strong result for a big number
of populations in terms of security, because the risk of
hacking the system would be higher.
According to this matter, the average accuracy rate for
the ‘‘SaS’’ strategy is in the second place by using 20
subjects in comparison with Yeom et al. [55] with fewer
subjects. This means that the presented authentication
system achieved a higher accuracy with more subjects
using the SaS strategy. On the other hand, brain patterns for
a specific mental task can change over time. Specifically,
accuracy of frameworks trained by preference-based tasks
[30] can corrupt as user tastes change.
It is important to note that the experiment performed in
this study can be used for the both short-term and longterm memories. It means that for the long-term memory
issues, the brain can produce the same signal amplitude by
re-seeing the same picture that have been seen (memorized) as a Brain-ID.
EEG brain signals are distinctive in general; however,
the processes of feature extraction to normalize differences
in time are a reason for some loss of uniqueness, which is
why the obtained results in some parts are not without
errors. There are many different ways and methods for
signal processing such as different types of signal filtering
and noise removing, feature extraction algorithms and
many other classification methods and classifiers that could
achieve different results but not significantly.
According to the literature, for this type of authentication method the alpha and beta frequencies are the most
appropriate bands because the main stimulus is thinking
and imagining a picture (visualizing) which is active.
However, in some cases, the combination of Beta and
Alpha bands (8–40 Hz) could acquire better accuracy than
the separate frequency bands. The differences between the
accuracy rates for each user with the same user strategy
show that capturing the raw signal can affect the results. It
means for some users the signal strength of the electrodes
was not steady in the time of recording because some of the

Classifier

Feature set

Precision

Recall

F-Score

Accuracy

AUC

LDA

PSD

0.89

0.83

0.85

0.86

0.92

SVM

PSD

0.89

0.86

0.86

0.88

0.93

Neural Computing and Applications
Table 6 Comparison of three different experiments with different strategies and classifiers
Experiments

Signal acquisition
strategy

The number of
subjects

Gui et al.

Read the words silently

32

Yeom et al.

Visual evoked potentials

Proposers

SaS

Channels

Features

Classifier

Ave
accuracy

6

Wavelet packet
decomposition

Neural
network

90%

10

18

Dynamic feature

SVM

86%

20

14

PSD

SVM

88%

participants had long hair and the hair had influence on the
quality of the signals, and on the other hand, the situation
of electrodes in Emotiv device was not suitable for the
shape of the some user’s head.
What this experiment adds is explicit to images in that
users are required to memorize; then, participants have
been asked to remember the introduced images. This study
gives a knowledge into how the brain sees pictures with
various attributes, and what that can educate us concerning
these images recall, which may help improving security
process for brain-based authentication methods.

4 Conclusion
Selecting each of the general protocols for recording EEG
including physical tasks and imaginary tasks can affect the
process and the accuracy of brain-based authentication
process.
Different mental tasks or brain-based paradigm will
have different outcomes. According to the literature, it is
shown that better results have been achieved from imaginary tasks and protocols in comparison with the physical
ones. Many different mental tasks have been tested and
good results achieved. However, most of them are very
complex and time-consuming for authentication process.
For a secure and fast brain-based authentication process,
we need an imaginary brain paradigm that can be used as a
brain-ID which in terms of security it is much better than
physical brain paradigms. Regarding to the literature, pictures and shapes can be easier to memorize and choosing a
good authorization paradigm could be very important for
authentication purposes. Therefore, in this study a brain
picturizing pattern has been tested by the proposed method
to predict image memorability and see which types of
images are easier to remember and are more appropriate to
use as brain-IDs.
This result shows that this strategy could be a very
useful way of authorization from each human’s brain-ID.
For this process, the user can look at a specific picture,
memorize it and register the brain-ID with imagining the
picture in the mind. Therefore, in terms of security, the

combination of these two could be a new hybrid strategy to
get better results for using the brain signals as an authentication technique.
Nowadays, biometric authentications are the most useful
techniques for smart devices and applications as a result of
the ease of use, security level. However, there are a few
detriments for certain techniques. Brainwave is another
human biometric, which can cover the limitations of other
types and could be the most secure biometric
authentication.
There were many studies utilizing brain signals as an
authentication technique, which in certain strategies high
accuracy achieved. However, they are only for some particular mental tasks.
Mental imagery and using visualizing pattern in the
mind could be a more secure brain pattern for using as a
brain-based authentication. Memorizing a picture in the
mind as a user ID would be a very useful way in terms of
security, because no one can see it in user’s mind and user
can change the pattern whenever is necessary.
In this paper, we investigated the use of an EEG brain
signal to predict image memorability and the possibility of
using mental imaginary pattern as a biometric authentication method. A new strategy (SaS) was used which in
comparison with other studies in terms of security could be
one of the most useful brain-based authentication patterns.
It should be noted also that this project by excreting all the
methods which were chosen for the preprocessing and
feature extraction and classification resulted an average of
88% accuracy rate, and the results could be slightly different by using different methods of signal processing and
classification.
The big challenge for all brain-based authentication
studies is that the brain patterns can change depending on
the brain situation. For instance, EEG data of a person can
change in situations like being sick, being drunk, being
addicted to drugs and getting mental issues like anxiety,
high stress, deep sadness and many other situations that any
human can experience. Therefore, it needs doing more
experiments in this area to improve the results, which can
be useful on all different mental situations of the human’s
brain, not just for a specific tasks in a specific situation. In

123

Neural Computing and Applications

future work, more experiments would be done to test different brain patterns in different brain situations to find the
uniqueness of human brain, which can be static in all different mental situations of human brains.

Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest The authors confirm that there is no conflict of
interest with this submission and this is an original work.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.

References
1. Yousefi F, Kolivand H (2019) Brain signals as a new biometric
authentication method using brain-computer interface. In: Lee N
(eds) Encyclopedia of computer graphics and games. Springer,
Cham, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08234-9_370-1
2. La Rocca D, Campisi P, Vegso B, Cserti P, Kozmann G, Babiloni
F, Fallani FDV (2014) Human brain distinctiveness based on
EEG spectral coherence connectivity. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng
61(9):2406–2412
3. Ashby C, Bhatia A, Tenore F, Vogelstein J (2011) Low-cost
electroencephalogram (EEG)-based authentication. In: NER:
proc. 5th int. IEEE/EMBS conf. on neural engineering, 2011,
pp. 442–445
4. Ruiz-Blondet MV, Jin Z, Laszlo S (2016) CEREBRE: a novel
method for very high accuracy event-related potential biometric
identification.
IEEE
Trans
Inform Forensics Secur
11(7):1618–1629
5. Chuang J, Nguyen H, Wang C, Johnson B (2013) I think,
therefore I am: usability and security of authentication using
brainwaves. In: Proc. int. conf. on financial cryptography and data
security. Springer, pp. 1–16
6. Chen Y, Atnafu AD, Schlattner I, Weldtsadik WT, Roh M-C,
Kim HJ, Lee S-W, Blankertz B, Fazli S (2016) A high-security
EEG-based login system with RSVP stimuli and dry electrodes.
IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 11(12):2635–2647
7. Curran MT, Yang JK, Merrill N, Chuang J, (2016) Passthoughts
authentication with low cost EarEEG. In: 2016 38th Annual
international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and
biology society (EMBC) (pp. 1979–1982). IEEE
8. Agrafioti F, Bui FM, Hatzinakos D (2009) Medical biometrics:
the perils of ignoring time dependency. In: Proc. IEEE 3rd int.
conf. biometrics, theory, appl., syst. (BTAS), 2009, pp 1–6
9. Neustadter E, Mathiak K, Turetsky BI (2016) EEG and MEG
probes of schizophrenia pathophysiology. In: The neurobiology
of Schizophrenia, 2016, pp. 213–236

123

10. Niedermeyer E, da Silva FL (2005) Electroencephalography:
basic principles, clinical applications, and related fields. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia
11. Catarino A, Churches O, Baron-Cohen S, Andrade A, Ring H
(2011) Atypical EEG complexity in autism spectrum conditions:
a multiscale entropy analysis. Clin Neurophysiol 122:2375–2383
12. Korde KS, Paikrao PL (2018) Analysis of EEG signals and
biomedical changes due to meditation on brain: a review. Int Res
J Eng Technol 5(1):603–606
13. Abuhashish FA, Zraqou J, Alkhodour W, Sunar MS, Kolivand H
(2015) Emotion interaction with virtual reality using hybrid
emotion classification technique toward brain signals. Int J
Computer Sci Inform Technol 7:159
14. Abhang PA, Gawali BW, Mehrotra SC (2016) Introduction to
EEG-and speech-based emotion recognition. Academic Press,
Cambridge
15. Mallick A, Kapgate D (2015) A review on signal pre-processing
techniques in brain computer interface. Int J Comput Technol
2(4):130–134
16. Abuhashish FAM, Kolivand H, Sunar MS, Mohamad D (2015)
Framework of controlling 3D virtual human emotional walking
using BCI. Jurnal Teknologi 75(4):17
17. Abuhashish FA, Sunar MS, Kolivand H, Mohamed F, Mohamad
DB (2014) Feature extracted classifiers based on eeg signals: a
survey. Life Sci J 11(4):366–368
18. Jain AK, Ross A, Prabhakar S (2004) An introduction to biometric recognition. IEEE Trans Circuits Syst Video Technol
14(1):4–20
19. Marasco E, Ross A (2014) A survey on anti-spoofing schemes for
fingerprint recognition systems. ACM Comput Surv 47(2):1–36
20. Cao K, Jain AK (2016) Hacking mobile phones using 2D printed
fingerprints. Technical Report MSU-CSE-16-2. Michigan State
University
21. Chaos Computer Club (CCC) (2014) Fingerprint biometrics
hacked again. https://www.ccc.de/en/updates/2014/ursel
22. Wijdicks EFM (1995) Determining brain death in adults. Neurology 45:1003–1011
23. Trokielewicz M, Czajka A, Maciejewicz P (2016) Post-mortem
human iris recognition. In: Proceedings of the 2016 international
conference on biometrics (ICB’16). pp. 1–6
24. Jain A, Bolle R, Pankanti S (2006) Biometrics: personal identification in networked society, vol 479. Springer, Berlin
25. Jayarathne I, Cohen M, Amarakeerthi S Survey of EEG-based
biometric authentication. In: Awareness science and technology
(iCAST), 2017 IEEE 8th international conference on, IEEE,
2017, pp. 324–329
26. Riera A, Dunne S, Cester I, Ruffini G, (2008) STARFAST: a
wireless wearable EEG/ECG biometric system based on the
ENOBIO sensor. In: Proceedings of the international workshop
on wearable micro and nanosystems for personalised health
27. Jayarathne I, Cohen M, Amarakeerthi S (2016) BrainID: development of an EEG-based biometric authentication system. In:
Information technology, electronics and mobile communication
conference (IEMCON), 2016 IEEE 7th Annual (pp. 1–6). IEEE
28. Yeom SK, Suk HI, Lee SW (2013) Person authentication from
neural activity of face-specific visual self-representation. Pattern
Recogn 46(4):1159–1169
29. Chuang J, Nguyen H, Wang C, Johnson B (2013) I think,
therefore i am: usability and security of authentication using
brainwaves. In: International conference on financial cryptography and data security, pp. 1–16. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg
(2013)
30. Ruiz-Blondet MV, Jin Z, Laszlo S (2016) CEREBRE: a novel
method for very high accuracy event-related potential biometric
identification. IEEE Trans Inf Forensics Secur 11(7):1618–1629

Neural Computing and Applications
31. Thorpe J, van Oorschot PC, Somayaji A (2005) Pass-thoughts:
authenticating with our minds. In: Proceedings of the 2005
workshop on new security paradigms pp. 45–56. ACM
32. Luck SJ (2014) An introduction to the event-related potential
technique. MIT press, Cambridge
33. Marcel S, Millán JDR (2007) Person authentication using
brainwaves (EEG) and maximum a posteriori model adaptation.
IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Machine Intell 29(4):743–752
34. Kumari P, Vaish A (2016) Feature-level fusion of mental task’s
brain signal for an efficient identification system. Neural Comput
Appl 27(3):659–669
35. Clark JM, Paivio A (1987) A dual coding perspective on
encoding processes. In: Imagery and related mnemonic processes
(pp. 5–33). Springer, New York, NY
36. Nelson DL, Cermak L, Craik F, (1979) Remembering pictures
and words: appearance, significance and name. Levels of processing in human memory, pp.45–76
37. Pearson J (2019) The human imagination: the cognitive neuroscience of visual mental imagery. Nat Rev Neurosci
20(10):624–634
38. Slotnick SD, Thompson WL, Kosslyn SM (2012) Visual memory
and visual mental imagery recruit common control and sensory
regions of the brain. Cognitive Neurosci 3(1):14–20
39. EMOTIV Inc. (2019). Online. Available: http://emotiv.com/epoc
40. Walia R, Ghosh S (2020) Design of active noise control system
using hybrid functional link artificial neural network and finite
impulse response filters. Neural Comput Appl 32(7):2257–2266
41. Sharma R, Pachori RB, Upadhyay A (2017) Automatic sleep
stages classification based on iterative filtering of electroencephalogram signals. Neural Comput Appl 28(10):2959–2978
42. Hyvärinen A, Oja E (2000) Independent component analysis:
algorithms and applications. Neural Netw 13:411–430
43. Acar E (2011) Classification of motor imagery tasks in EEG
signal and Its application to a brain-computer interface for
Controlling assistive environmental devices (Master’s thesis)
44. Bracewell RN, Bracewell RN (1986) The Fourier transform and
its applications, vol 31999. McGraw-Hill, New York
45. Miyamoto C, Baba S, Nakanishi I (2009) Biometric person
authentication
using
new
spectral
features
of

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.
51.

52.

53.
54.

55.

electroencephalogram (EEG). In: Proceedings of the 2008 international symposium on intelligent signal processing &
communication
Nakanishi I, Baba S, Miyamoto C (2009) EEG based biometric
authentication using new spectral features. In: Proceedings of the
2009 international symposium on intelligent signal processing &
communication systems (ISPACS’09). 651–654. Systems
(ISPACS’09). pp 1–4
de Jesús Rubio J (2017) Stable Kalman filter and neural network
for the chaotic systems identification. J Franklin Inst
354(16):7444–7462
Liu B, Ding Z, Lv C (2019) Distributed training for multi-layer
neural networks by consensus. IEEE Trans Neural Netw Learn
Syst. https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2921926
de Jesús Rubio J (2009) SOFMLS: online self-organizing fuzzy
modified least-squares network. IEEE Trans Fuzzy Syst
17(6):1296–1309
de Jesús Rubio J (2017) USNFIS: uniform stable neuro fuzzy
inference system. Neurocomputing 262:57–66
Hasan MR, Ibrahimy MI, Motakabber SMA, Shahid S (2015)
Classification of multichannel EEG signal by linear discriminant
analysis. In: Progress in systems engineering (pp. 279–282).
Springer, Cham
Rathinavel S, Arumugam S (2011) Full shoe print recognition
based on pass band DCT and partial shoe print identification
using overlapped block method for degraded images. Int J
Computer Appl 26(8):16–21
Gunn SR (1998) Support vector machines for classification and
regression. ISIS Technical Rep 14(1):5–16
Gui Q, Jin Z, Xu W (2014) Exploring EEG- based biometrics for
user identification and authentication. In: Proceedings of the
signal processing in medicine and biology symposium,
Philadelphia, PA, USA,13; pp. 1–6
Yeom S-K, Suk H-I, Lee S-W (2013) Person authentication from
neural activity of face-specific visual self-representation. Pattern
Recognit. 46:1159–1169

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

123

