Citation/Reference

Zink, R., Hunyadi, B. ; Van Huffel, S. ; De Vos, M. 2015
Classifying the Auditory P300 using mobile EEG recordings without
calibration phase.
37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society of the IEEE (EMBS)

Archived version

Author manuscript: the content is identical to the content of the
published paper, but without the final typesetting by the publisher

Published version

Not yet available

Journal homepage

http://embc.embs.org/2015/

Author contact

rob.zink@esat.kuleuven.be
+32 16 32 76 83

IR

Klik hier als u tekst wilt invoeren.

Classifying the Auditory P300 using mobile EEG recordings without
calibration phase.*
R. Zink, B. Hunyádi, S. Van Huffel, and M. De Vos


Abstract— One of the major drawbacks in mobile EEG
Brain Computer Interfaces (BCI) is the need for subject
specific training data to train a classifier. By removing the need
for supervised classification and calibration phase, new users
could start immediate interaction with a BCI. We propose a
solution to exploit the structural difference by means of
canonical polyadic decomposition (CPD) for three-class
auditory oddball data without the need for subject-specific
information. We achieve this by adding average event-relatedpotential (ERP) templates to the CPD model. This constitutes a
novel similarity measure between single-trial pairs and knowntemplates, which results in a fast and interpretable classifier.
These results have similar accuracy to those of the supervised
and cross-validated stepwise LDA approach but without the
need for having subject-dependent data. Therefore the
described CPD method has a significant practical advantage
over the traditional and widely used approach.

I. INTRODUCTION
Brain-Computer-Interfaces (BCI) allow users to control a
device by thought alone. Although several measures are able
to constitute such an interface (e.g. fMRI, NIRS), EEG is the
most popular modality to date, mostly due to its relative low
cost and high temporal resolution. Moreover the emergence
of mobile EEG systems removed the restriction of BCIs to be
used in a laboratory setting. Nowadays the field of mobile
EEG is emerging rapidly as is evident from the large number
of new applications on the one hand, and hardware
developments on the other [1,2,3].
The acceptance of these BCIs in mobile settings depends
largely upon their accuracy and ease of use. Many machinelearning methods for BCI extract meaningful features and
optimize a classifier function based on training data of the
test-subject. The information transfer rate, given in bits per
trial, is used as an evaluation measurement to rank a
method’s time-efficiency [2]. Although this is meaningful to
compare supervised classifiers, these measures do not always
take into account the magnitude of training data needed for
the classifier to be trained. Recently there has been increased
interest for calibration free BCI methods [4,5,6]. These could
be especially beneficial for short-term interactions.
* Research supported by Research Council KUL: GOA/10/09 MaNet,
CoE PFV/10/002 (OPTEC); PhD/Postdoc grants; Flemish Government,
FWO projects: G.0427.10N; EU: ERC Advanced Grant: BIOTENSORS
(nr. 339804). This paper reflects only the authors’ views, and the Union is
not liable for any use that may be made of the contained information.
R. Z., B. H and S. V. H. are with KU Leuven, Department of Electrical
Engineering (ESAT), STADIUS Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal
Processing and Data Analytics, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, 3001 Heverlee,
Belgium and iMinds Medical IT, (e-mail: rob.zink@esat.kuleuven.be,
bori.hunyadi@esat.kuleuven.be and Sabine.VanHuffel@esat.kuleuven.be).
M. D. V. is with the Engineering Department, Oxford University, Oxford
United Kingdom (e-mail: maarten.devos@eng.ox.ac.uk) and Cluster of
Excellence Hearing4all, University of Oldenburg, Germany.

In this paper we propose a new data driven approach to
classify the P300 component as apparent in a three-class
auditory oddball paradigm. Focusing attention to either a low
or high tone generates (in most cases) a P300 ERP most
dominant at central posterior electrodes [7]. We aim to
remove the need for subject specific training data in the
classification process by incorporating a subject independent
stimulus response template in a Canonical Polyadic
Decomposition (CPD). The latter has been shown to be able
to derive meaningful estimates for large datasets without
label information [8,9]. We extend this approach to the
classification of single trial pairs of target and non-target (i.e.
high-low tone stimuli).
We hypothesize that the incorporation of subjectindependent a priori knowledge about the stimulus protocol
and expected responses into data-driven CPD models will
allow classification of single trial ERPs. We propose a CPD
model with inclusion of average ERP templates to enhance
the separability of target and non-target trials with respect to
the template. We validate our methods on three-class auditory
oddball data to classify 94 target-non-target trial pairs per
subject, for twenty subjects. CPD models require a specific
rank and initialization that is difficult to determine under
these conditions [8]. Therefore, in addition, this approach
aims to reduce the need for specific parameter optimization.
Our results are compared to those of step-wise linear
discriminant analysis (swLDA), a prominent classifier for the
P300 ERP. Lastly, we depict possible improvements of the
current model taking into account the apparent limitations for
generalization to other BCI paradigms.
II. DATA AND METHODS
A. Data Acquisition
Twenty healthy subjects (mean age 24.6 years) performed
a three-class oddball auditory task. All participants signed
informed consent prior to participation and received
monetary reimbursement. The ethics committee of the
University of Oldenburg approved the study. This data is
obtained from [2].Two deviant 62 ms-tones of 600 Hz and
1200 Hz, and one standard 900 Hz tone were played back
randomly (ISI 1000 ms, Jitter 0-375 ms). The task of the
participants was to silently count these target tones (ten
subjects were instructed to pay attention to the 1200 Hz tone
and the other ten to the 600 Hz tone), ignoring the other two
tones. Ninety-four target deviants, 504 standards and 94
deviants that were non-targets were presented randomly
while each participant was seated outdoors on a chair.
Control of the experiment and delivery of the stimulus was
achieved through utilization of OpenViBE software running
on a laptop computer. An Emotiv (www.emotiv.com) EEG
system with modifications was used to perform data
acquisition as described in [3,10]. Sintered Ag/AgCl

electrodes were placed at the 10–20 positions FPz, F3, Fz,
F4, C3, Cz, C4, TP9, TP10, P3, Pz, P4, O1, and O2.

that the non-Target stimuli induce a pattern that is similar to
that of the baseline, whereas that of the targets is not.

B. Pre-Processing
MATLAB and EEGLAB [11] were utilized to analyze the
EEG data offline. A semi-automatic attenuation of eye-blink
artifacts was achieved through extended infomax ICA
(Independent Component Analysis) [12]. A 20 Hz low-pass
filter was applied, and an average of TP10 and TP9 was used
for re-referencing. Subsequently, TP10 and TP9 were
removed. A pre-stimulus baseline correction was applied
after epoch extraction (-200 to 800ms).

We construct an average Baseline-Template based on 19
subjects. This is done for all 20 subjects to obtain, per
subject, a baseline template from non-subject-specific
information. This template is used to evaluate the unknown
trial pairs through a decomposition using CPD.

Additionally the data were down-sampled from 128 Hz to
30 Hz before fitting the CPD. This speeds up the CPD and is
expected to still capture most of the P300 waveforms [8]. A
window of 167 – 633 ms after stimulus onset (SO) is set in
order to obtain a general discriminative window for the P300.
Figure 1 displays the average (of n-1 subjects) Z-scored ERPs
of the Target, non-Target and Baseline stimuli at Cz. For
each subject we can create such model ERPs based on the
average of the other 19 subjects. Similar patterns as those in
Figure 1 are observable across subjects indicating that we
have set an appropriate window for P300 discrimination.

Figure 1: Grand-average (n-1) ERPs at electrode Cz to the Target, nontarget and baseline tone. The vertical lines indicate the general window set
for P300 discrimination.

C. Baseline Template
The aim of the proposed method is to identify target and
non-target trials based on the similarity to a template. This
similarity measure is achieved through a data-driven CPD;
we reach a rank-1 approximation of the tensor. Including a
template ensures that the CPD model will converge more
likely to a discriminative space. Evidently, the three stimulus
types (i.e. Baseline, Target, non-Target) induce (slightly)
different ERP waveforms. Regarding the Targets, no
differences were observed between the 600 and 1200 Hz
tone. Moreover, the Baseline and non-Target responses have
similar spatio-temporal patterns. As an example, the average
(of n-1 subjects) ERP templates for the Baseline, non-Target
and Target stimuli are illustrated in Figure 2 from top to
bottom respectively. Subtracting the latter two templates
from the baseline, we can quantify the average absolute
difference (in Z-scores) per time/channel point. The average
distance per sample is 0.06 between baseline and non-targets,
and 0.19 between baseline and targets. These values confirm

Figure 2: Grand-Average (n-1) heatmap of the spatio-temporal subspace for
each of the stimulus types Baseline, non-Targets and Targets, from top to
bottom respectively.

D. CPD
Multidimensional signals can be decomposed by the CPD
(Canonical Polyadic Decomposition) as a rank-1 tensor sum
[13]. For the three-dimensional case the CPD will decompose
a tensor χ as follows:

with R representing the number of components, ar, br,
and cr the signatures of every atom in each of the modes, and
Ԑ the model error. Each mode has a specific signature which
characterizes every component that is extracted; in the usual
three-dimensional tensor of the ERP analysis [channel x time
x trials], the spatial distribution would be 'a', the time course
would be 'b', and a given source's trial loadings would be 'c'.
The Canonical Polyadic Decomposition model is trilinear,

which means that each mode's vectors are proportional to
each other. In case the data follows a rank-R structure, the
decomposition is unique up to permutation and scaling of the
extracted components [14].
Since the aim of the oddball paradigm is to induce a P300
to attended stimuli and not to non-targets we aim to construct
a data tensor to exploit the brain responses as elicited by the
paradigm for a data-driven classifier. For every trial pair we
can construct a 12 x 15 x 3 data tensor: 12 channels, 15 time
points, and 3 ‘trials’. The trial dimension consists of the
unknown target pair (1 target and 1 non-target) to which we
add the Baseline template. The trial loadings (i.e. ‘c’ in the
equation above) represent the contribution of the time-course
on each of these trials. For each tensor we aim for the best
rank-1 approximation. The CPD algorithm non-linear least
squares is used as implemented in the Tensorlab 2.0 Toolbox
[15]. Per subject, for all 94 trial pairs, the baseline template is
fixed. Only across subjects do we vary the template
according to the averages of the non-subject-data ERPs (as
mentioned in section C). Maintaining the structure of the data
allows for a decomposition in which we can derive a
similarity measure of each trial to the template. This factor
vector of the extracted component will provide meaningful
information for classification.
E. Classification
The CPD of the data tensor per single trial will extract 1
component per trial pair. The third factor represents the trial
weights accredited to the template and the 2 unknown trials.
In order to classify which trial is the Target or non-Target
trial we calculate the absolute difference between the trial
loading of the template (trial 1) and the two ‘unknowns’, trial
2 and trial 3. See Figure 5 in the results section for an
example. The trial-value with the largest absolute difference
from the template is considered the Target trial, the other the
non-Target.
swLDA - one of the more commonly utilized algorithms
for P300 classification - was compared to the CPD based
accuracies for a relevant evaluation. The original set of
features comprised seventeen 47 ms data bins on all twelve
electrodes between 0–800 ms. Features are added in sequence
when using the swLDA method. The final set of features has
a new feature added to it if it improves discrimination of class
statistically (pin < 0.1). A redundant feature could be removed
following the addition of a new feature and a subsequent
reappraisal of the current features (pout > 0.15) [2]. Although
the total number of features utilized is reduced by the
stepwise selection of features, a further reduction in
overfitting risks was achieved by shrinkage regularization as
per BCILAB implementation. The swLDA classification
results are obtained with a 5 fold cross-validation procedure.
This means that the classifier is trained on 4/5 of the data and
tested on the remaining 1/5 which is repeated for different
distributions of these parts.
Classification accuracy of single subjects was judged to
be over the level of chance significantly if they were found to
be higher than a cut-off value. This cut-off was defined as
chance-level plus two standard errors, i.e.
(0.5∙0.5)

0.5 + 2 ∙ √

188

= 0.573 [16]. Figure 3 summarizes the

most important steps in the processing pipeline for both
swLDA and CPD.

Figure 3. Overview of the most important steps in the analysis for stepwise
LDA and CPD.

III. RESULTS
A. Classification Accuracy
Discriminating between the target and non-target trials
was above chance level in 19 subjects for swLDA and all
subjects for CPD. The average classification accuracy is
70.8% (SD = 8.0) for swLDA and 70.4% (SD = 7.9) for
CPD. Even though the averages are almost identical, at the
single subject level differences can be observed as shown in
figure 4. The correlation between the CPD and LDA results
is moderate (Pearson’s r = .55, p = .012, two-tailed). Subjects
1, 2, 7, 17, 18, 19, 20 have a difference in accuracy larger
than 5% between both methods. Further analysis showed that
these differences can largely be explained by the similarity of
the target and non-target average data ERPs to the general
baseline template – (e.g. subject 17 has an average target
ERP that is very different from the baseline template,
whereas subject 1 does not).

Figure 4: Average classification accuracy for CPD and swLDA for each of
the 20 subjects. The blue line represents the above chance-level cut-off (i.e.
two standard errors).

B. Single Subject CPD model
Figure 5 illustrates the results of the average single
subject extracted CPD components for subject 3. The first
factor represents the distribution over the 12 channels, the
second the temporal estimation and the third represents the
trial-factor. Note that the (overall) spatio-temporal pattern of
the component is able to create a discriminative model for the
P300; the temporal mode displays a P300 waveform, and the
Target trial deviates the most from the Baseline-Template.

could be distinguished more accurately using a Block Term
Decomposition (BTD). BTD allows for more flexible
estimation of time properties in a so called (L,L,1)decomposition [17] in which the spatial and time dimension
are approximated by rank-L components. This might lead to
better estimates of signal and noise and thus improve the
discriminative subspace of the extracted P300. Similarly, the
effectiveness of adaptive models or parameters (e.g. adaptive
template, respectively) has yet to be determined.
To conclude, with a simple template based CPD model
we are able to competitively classify target/non-target-pairs
without the need for a calibration phase. Future studies
should focus on extensions of the CPD model,
feature/template formations, and the generalization to other
paradigms/setups.
REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

Figure 5: Average CPD outcome of subject 3, illustrating the decomposition
with the corresponding spatial, temporal and trial mode vectors. SO =
stimulus onset.

[3]

[4]

IV. CONCLUSION & DISCUSSION
Our CPD model does not require subject specific
information to obtain classification accuracies comparable to
(supervised) swLDA for the classification of auditory oddball
BCI data. The largest advantage over swLDA is that we can
instantly start with the classification process. The swLDA
results are based on using 80% of the data as training (5-fold
cross validation). The average Baseline template used in the
CPD models does not take spatial or temporal shifts into
account between trials. Nevertheless, our model already
seems to achieve an accurate distinction between target and
non-target trials.
The moderate correlation between CPD and swLDA
results suggests that both methods are classifying the P300 in
different ways. The LDA model maximizes the classification
accuracy per subject in the feature-weighting step. The CPD
model relies strongly on the P300 spatio-temporal structure
present at the target-trial (e.g. average in Figure 5). Future
study is required to evaluate the relationship of the CPD and
LDA classification results more in depth on the single subject
and trial level.
Our CPD model performance is based on the P300
waveform differences in an appropriate window set. If for
example the N100 ERP was included, the estimated subspace
by CPD likely includes the (large) N100 as well, lowering the
discrimination power for the P300. Whether the number of
channels and or other paradigms lead to similar findings is
yet to be discovered.
Two extensions that might improve the current CPD
model performance could be to include other templates (e.g.
P300 or an artificial signal/noise template), or evaluate a low
rank model instead of a rank-1 CPD. The ERP’s time and
waveform changes between the target and non-target trial

[5]

[6]
[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

Mihajlovic, V., Grundlehner, B., Vullers, R., & Penders, J. (2014).
Wearable, Wireless EEG Solutions in Daily Life Applications: What
are we missing? IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics,
vol.PP, no.99, pp.1,1
De Vos, M., Gandras, K., & Debener, S. (2014). Towards a truly
mobile auditory brain–computer interface: Exploring the P300 to take
away. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 91(1), 46-53.
Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R., Gandras, K., & Vos, M. (2012).
How about taking a low‐cost, small, and wireless EEG for a walk?
Psychophysiology, 49(11), 1617-1621.
Kindermans, P. J., Schreuder, M., Schrauwen, B., Müller, K. R., &
Tangermann, M. (2014). True Zero-Training Brain-Computer
Interfacing–An Online Study. PloS one, 9(7), e102504.
Grizou, J., Iturrate, I., Montesano, L., & Oudeyer, P. Y. (2014).
Calibration-Free BCI Based Control. In Twenty-Eighth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (No. EPFL-CONF-198763).
Barachant, A., & Congedo, M. (2014). A Plug&Play P300 BCI Using
Information Geometry. Technical report arXiv: 1409.0107.
Farquhar, J., & Hill, N. J. (2013). Interactions between pre-processing
and classification methods for event-related-potential classification.
Neuroinformatics, 11(2), 175-192.
Zink, R., Hunyadi, B., Van Huffel, S., De Vos, M. (2015). Exploring
CPD based unsupervised classification for auditory BCI with mobile
EEG. Neural Engineering (NER). 7th International IEEE/EMBS.
Vanderperren, K., Mijović, B., Novitskiy, N., Vanrumste, B., Stiers,
P., Van den Bergh, B. R., .& De Vos, M. (2013). Single trial ERP
reading based on parallel factor analysis. Psychophysiology, 50, 97110.
De Vos, M., Kroesen, M., Emkes, R., & Debener, S. (2014). P300
speller BCI with a mobile EEG system: comparison to a traditional
amplifier. Journal of neural engineering, 11(3), 036008.
Delorme, A., Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Acar, Z. A., Bigdely-Shamlo, N.,
Vankov, A., & Makeig, S. (2011). EEGLAB, SIFT, NFT, BCILAB,
and ERICA: new tools for advanced EEG processing. Computational
intelligence and neuroscience, 2011, 10.
De Vos, M., De Lathauwer, L., & Van Huffel, S. (2011). Spatially
constrained ICA algorithm with an application in EEG processing.
Signal Processing, 91(8), 1963-1972.
Harshman, R. A. (1970). Foundations of the parafac procedure:
models and conditions for an" explanatory" multimodal factor
analysis. Technical report, UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics, 1-84.
Kolda, T. G., & Bader, B. W. (2009). Tensor decompositions and
applications. SIAM review, 51(3), 455-500.
Sorber, L., Van Barel, M., & De Lathauwer, L. T. (2014).Tensorlab
v2. 0. Available online, URL: http://www. tensorlab. net.
Hill, N. J., & Schölkopf, B. (2012). An online brain–computer
interface based on shifting attention to concurrent streams of auditory
stimuli. Journal of neural engineering, 9(2), 026011.
Sorber, L., Van Barel, M., & De Lathauwer, L. (2013). OptimizationBased Algorithms for Tensor Decompositions: Canonical Polyadic
Decomposition, Decomposition in Rank-(Lr,Lr,1) Terms, and a New
Generalization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(2), 695-720.

