Citation/Reference

Zink, R., Hunyadi, B. ; Van Huffel, S. ; De Vos, M. 2015
Exploring CPD based unsupervised classification for auditory BCI
with mobile EEG
Neural Engineering (NER), 2015 7th International IEEE/EMBS
Conference on, 53 - 56.

Archived version

Author manuscript: the content is identical to the content of the
published paper, but without the final typesetting by the publisher

Published version

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/NER.2015.7146558

Journal homepage

http://neuro.embs.org/2015/

Author contact

rob.zink@esat.kuleuven.be
+32 16 32 76 83

IR

Klik hier als u tekst wilt invoeren.

Exploring CPD based unsupervised classification for auditory BCI
with mobile EEG.*
R. Zink, B. Hunyadi, S. Van Huffel, and M. De Vos.


Abstract— The analysis of mobile EEG Brain Computer
Interface (BCI) recordings can benefit from unsupervised
learning methods. Removing the calibration phase allows for
faster and shorter interactions with a BCI and could potentially
deal with non-stationarity issues in the signal quality. Here we
present a data-driven approach based on a trilinear
decomposition, Canonical Polyadic Decomposition (CPD),
applied to an auditory BCI dataset. Different ways to construct
a data-tensor for this purpose and how the results can be
interpreted are explained. We also discuss current limitations
in terms of trial identification and model initialization. The
results of the new analysis are shown to be comparable to those
of the traditional supervised stepwise LDA approach.

I. INTRODUCTION
To date, the majority of studies exploring brain dynamics
using EEG are still conducted in artificial settings like
hospitals and research labs [1]. These recordings lack the
ability to investigate the full dynamics of our brains in reallife. In particular, the field of Brain Computer Interfaces
(BCIs) would tremendously benefit from fully mobile
recordings [2].
Currently most BCI systems involve 2 stages: training
and testing. During the training stage, a supervised classifier
is trained on the recorded data to discriminate between
different stimulus classes. However, supervised classification
methods require a reasonable amount of training data to
optimize classifier performance. Acquiring separate train and
test data increases the overall setup time. Moreover, nonstationarities due to varying signal quality and brain
adaptations over time decrease the classifier’s performance
when train and test data are further apart in time. Especially
in augmented reality scenarios in which only sparse
interaction with a BCI is needed, supervised techniques still
carry significant drawbacks.
Unsupervised classification methods can potentially
address these issues and be advantageous for use in mobile
BCI applications [3,4]. This paper proposes a new approach
for unsupervised classification of single trial ERP data based
on Canonical Polyadic Decomposition (CPD). CPD is a
* Research supported by Research Council KUL: GOA/10/09 MaNet,
CoE PFV/10/002 (OPTEC); PhD/Postdoc grants; Flemish Government,
FWO projects: G.0427.10N; Belgian Federal Science Policy Office: IUAP
P7/19/ (DYSCO, `Dynamical systems, control and optimization', 20122017); EU: ERC Advanced Grant: BIOTENSORS (n 339804).
R. Z., B. H and S. V. H. are with KU Leuven, Department of Electrical
Engineering (ESAT), STADIUS Center for Dynamical Systems, Signal
Processing and Data Analytics, Kasteelpark Arenberg 10, 3001 Heverlee,
Belgium and iMinds Medical IT, (e-mail: rob.zink@esat.kuleuven.be,
bori.hunyadi@esat.kuleuven.be and Sabine.VanHuffel@esat.kuleuven.be).
M. D. V. is with the Engineering Department, Oxford University, Oxford
United Kingdom (e-mail: maarten.devos@eng.ox.ac.uk) and Cluster of
Excellence Hearing4all, University of Oldenburg, Germany.

data-driven method that exploits multidimensional structure
in data naturally present in single trial BCI datasets. It allows
automatic derivation of multidimensional fingerprints, given
that appropriate model parameters are set. Tensor based
methods allow for intuitive interpretation of a structured
dataset [5]. CPD has been applied in supervised ways to
classify single trial ERP data before [6]. We extend this work
and propose an unsupervised CPD approach to automatically
cluster auditory BCI data. Label information from prior trials
is still utilized to evaluate the accuracy of the CPD models;
however the actual CPD estimates are independent of any
labeled data.
We demonstrate the potential of the new approach on a
three-class auditory oddball dataset recorded with a recently
developed mobile EEG device. We hypothesize that CPD is
able to extract signal sources that allow discriminating target
and distractor stimuli. Exploiting the spatial, temporal, and
frequency information present in the EEG, discrimination
between different stimulus types is obtained. To illustrate our
methodology, we first explore the relationship between the
CPD parameters and performance on large datasets of 188
trials. An accurate CPD on smaller time-windows would
allow for applications involving short-term interactions with
a BCI (e.g. operating assistive technologies). To this end we
present a method to classify single trials in a 10-trial window.
The results are compared to those of stepwise LDA
(swLDA), which is considered a prominent classifier for the
P300 ERP. We also define future lines of research tackling
the current limitations of CPD based classification for online
unsupervised BCI.
II. DATA & METHODS
A. Data acquisition and stimuli
Eight healthy subjects (mean age 24.6 years) performed a
three-class oddball auditory task. These subjects are part of
the data described in [2]. A standard tone (900 Hz) and two
deviant tones (600, 1200 Hz) of 62-ms duration (10 ms
rise/fall time) were presented in random order (ISI 1000 ms,
Jitter 0-375 ms). The participants' task was to silently count
the target tones (i.e. for 4 subjects the 600Hz tone and other 4
subjects the 1200Hz tone) and ignore the two other tones. 504
standards, 94 non-target deviants and 94 target deviants were
presented in randomized order while the subject was sitting
on a chair outside. OpenViBE software running on a
notebook was used for stimulus delivery and experiment
control. Data acquisition was performed with a modified
Emotiv (www.emotiv.com) EEG system as described in
[7,8]. Sintered Ag/AgCl electrodes were placed at the 10–20
positions FPz, F3, Fz, F4, C3, Cz, C4, TP9, TP10, P3, Pz, P4,
O1, and O2 (with common mode suppression (“online
reference”) at AFz and driven right leg (“ground”) at FCz).

B. Pre-processing
The data were analyzed offline using EEGLAB [9] and
MATLAB. Extended infomax independent component
analysis (ICA) was used to semi-automatically attenuate
contributions from eye blink artifact [10]. EEG data were 20
Hz low-pass filtered, re-referenced to the average of Tp9 and
Tp10, and epochs were extracted from −200 to 800 ms and
baseline corrected (−200 to 0 ms). In order to speed up the
CPD, the data were down-sampled from 128 Hz to 30 Hz. As
input for the CPD we concurrently looked at the temporal
signal as well as two derived signals: the normalized time
signal and the frequency power. For the former this was
achieved by normalizing every epoch to z scores and the
latter by computing a fast-fourier transform of every epoch.
CPD decompositions were computed on a post stimulus
interval of 100-800ms. For the latter we selected the
amplitude and phase information in a 2-14 Hz interval, as this
is expected to capture most of the P300 waveforms [11].
C. CPD
Canonical Polyadic Decomposition (CPD) decomposes
multidimensional signals into a sum of rank-1 tensors [12].
Every extracted component is characterized by a certain
signature in each of the modes; in the usual ERP analysis’
[channel x time x trials] tensor, 'a' would be the spatial
distribution, ‘b’ would be the time course, and ‘c’ would be
the trial loadings of a given source. For the three-dimensional
case the CPD will decompose a tensor χ as follows:

with R representing the number of components, ar, br, and cr
the signatures of every atom in each of the modes, and Ԑ the
model error. CPD is a trilinear model, meaning the vectors
along each mode are proportional to each other. Hence, the
CPD model assumes that the source maintains the same
P300-waveform and topography within the observed trials.
The data is structured in three different tensors following
the last three preprocessing steps. Firstly, the data is
structured as [channels x time x trials], which is expected to
capture the P300 waveform present in the data; this is
referred to as CPDtime. Similarly we construct a tensor with
the normalized time signals which is referred to as CPDtimeNorm. Normalizing the time course is expected to improve
the CPD model’s accuracy in detecting small amplitude
changes on some channels in contrast to high amplitudes due
to artifacts on others. For both described time models the
fluctuation in magnitude of the P300 can be taken care of by
CPD; it is reflected in the trial mode signature. However,
shifts in the P300 latency between trials cannot be resolved
thusly. In order to deal with these latency changes we apply a
third CPD model on the frequency estimates from every trial
in a [channels x frequency x trials] tensor, referred to as
CPDfreq. In this study, the CPD using the alternating least
squares algorithm as implemented in Tensorlab 2.0 Toolbox
was used [13].
D. Model Parameters
The success of CPD depends on the appropriate setup of
certain parameters in the analysis. For the full dataset
analysis we discuss the most influential parameters:

initialization and rank determination. Being a non-convex
optimization method, CPD is not guaranteed to always find
the optimal solution. Therefore we report our results based on
100 random initializations. This way we derive reliability
estimates and present results based on the best initialization
as evaluated by classification accuracy. The rank (R) is
expected to differ with the complexity of the dataset.
Although semi-automatic rank determination algorithms
exist, for noisy EEG data they tend to greatly overestimate
the rank. Without defining a specific rank beforehand, we
evaluate the results for different ranks ranging from 1 to 12.
Finally, the 10 trial windows are decomposed into rank-1
components, as this is the most basic setup.
E. Discriminating trials
In order to discriminate between target and distractor
trials with CPD we focus on the factor estimates in the trialmode. If the rank equals 1, we obtain a single vector with
trial weights. Two classes can be distinguished with opposite
signs, allowing for a simple, yet effective separation
technique (e.g. Figure 3). In the case of a higher rank we
consider a k-means cluster algorithm (k-means++) to find 2
distinct clusters. All trial modes of the R-components are
given as input for k-means. Being dependent on semi-random
initializations, the k-means procedure is repeated 999 times
and the most frequent prediction vector is used as final
prediction.
First we explore the relationship between the CPD
parameters and performance on large datasets of 188 trials.
Secondly, we investigate its performance on 10-trial subsets
(with equal class distribution). Consequently, the 10-trial
overall performance is based on 178 models per subject of 10
trials which are time-shifted by 1 trial for the consecutive
model. Single trials are analyzed together with the previous 9
trials in time. The number of correctly classified trials (max =
178) of the 10-trial models is reported as performance
measure for each subject. Figure 1 summarizes the most
important steps in the CPD analysis. Both the sign and kmeans clustering only allow for separation of trials into two
classes; it does not identify which class corresponds to the
target or distractor stimuli. Label information from prior trials
is utilized to evaluate the accuracy of the derived CPD
estimates in the 10-trial decompositions. This was achieved
by comparing the estimate of the newly added trial to that of
the other trials with known labels in that window. This way
we can identify which sign is associated with the target class.
Future extensions for an adaptive way of determining the
identity of the trials are presented in the discussion.

Figure 1: Overview of the most important CPD analysis steps.

Evaluation of the CPD based accuracies is achieved by a
comparison to those of swLDA, which is one of the widely
used P300 classification algorithms. The original feature set
consisted of seventeen 47 ms data bins between 0 and 800 ms
on all 12 electrodes. The swLDA method adds relevant
features sequentially. A new feature is added to the final
feature set if it statistically improves class discrimination (pin
< 0.1). After adding a new feature, reanalysis of the current
features could lead to removal of a redundant feature (pout >
0.15). Although the stepwise feature selection reduces the
number of features used, shrinkage regularization as
implemented in BCILAB [9] was applied to further reduce
the risk of overfitting. Half of the trials are used for training
and the other half for testing and vice-versa in the full dataset.
Classification results for the small 10-trial subsets are
obtained with a 5 fold cross-validation procedure.
III. RESULTS
A. Electrophysiological results
The subject average subtraction of target-distractor ERPs
are presented in Figure 2. These averages illustrate different
waveforms of the P300 and peak amplitude and latency
between the eight subjects. For all subjects, the P300 of the
target stimuli was significantly (at a 5% chance level) larger
compared to the distractor stimuli at the P300 peak latency on
the Pz electrode. Trial type classification for target and
distractor resulted on average in 74.7% accuracy (Standard
Deviation (SD) = 6.7) for swLDA across subjects.

Figure 2: Average difference ERPs per subject at electrode Pz.

B. CPD parameters on all trials
In order to illustrate the underlying single subject
decomposition process, components from both a CPDtime
and CPDfreq for a representative subject are shown in figure
3. The modes correspond to the spatial, temporal and trial
dimensions from top to bottom, respectively. The CPDtime
component follows the average target ERP (red dots).
Similarly, the CPDfreq component is congruent with the
target stimulus’ frequency spectrum. This leads to similar
trial distributions in the third mode. Based on these trial
factor loadings, 74.7 and 78.2% correct identification of the
trials was obtained for the time and frequency model,
respectively. These CPD components are uniquely
reconstructed up to arbitrary scaling and permutation of the
modes which explains the opposite signs for class-1 between
the two CPD models. Finally, equivalent spatial maps can be
observed with a strong focus on electrodes Cz and Pz.

Figure 3: Single subject (S3, rank 1) example of a CPDtime and
CPDfreq component on the large dataset. The modes correspond to
the spatial, temporal and trial dimensions from top to bottom,
respectively. The first half of the trials corresponds to the target
stimuli, the latter to the distractor. This is also reflected in the trial
factor loadings by CPD (75% and 78% accuracy, respectively).

Figure 4 illustrates the average discrimination across
subjects for rank 1 to 12 based on optimal initializations for
CPD. On average across subjects, for all three CPD models
(i.e. time, time-norm and frequency) we obtained up to
75.5% (SD = 6.8), 75.0% (SD = 5.7) and 77.5% (SD = 5.4)
discrimination respectively. No significant differences were
observed between swLDA and neither the CPDtime for
ranks > 3 nor the CPDfreq for ranks > 1.
The CPDtime-norm and CPDfreq models outperform the
time based models for lower ranks on this large dataset.
However, the fluctuations between models with different
initializations differ substantially. The CPDfreq models are
considerably influenced by the initialization compared to the
time models at lower ranks (<6). Further analysis showed
that for low rank it often gets stuck at a local minimum
which is not discriminative.

Figure 4: Grand-average accuracy for different ranks of the CPD
models. The swLDA accuracy is indicated as reference.

C. 10 trial CPD models
Classification accuracies on the 10-trial subsets for the
swLDA are on average 62.1% (SD = 4.7) across subjects.

For the CPD models based on the time, normalized time and
frequency tensor we obtained 56.4 (SD = 2.1), 63.0 (SD =
5.8) and 62.9% (SD = 4.7) accuracy respectively. The
normalized time and frequency CPD results are comparable
to those of swLDA. Figure 5 illustrates the average
accuracies for each subject. Further analysis showed that the
CPDtime outcomes were only mildly influenced by the
changes between random initializations. The frequency CPD
models varied substantially, similar to the full dataset
results. Finally, we observed that components that correlated
positively with the target ERP as opposed to the distractor
ERP (or vice-versa) scored higher in discriminating power.

However, this measure proved unsuccessful in identifying
well-classifying models.
Improvement of the classification results by combining
the trial dimensions of the CPDtime and CPDfreq models in
a joint classifier did not lead to an overall improved
classification. This suggests that both time and frequency
decompositions provide signal components that represent
approximately similar underlying source activation. For the
10-trial analysis, the normalized tensor seems to be well
decomposed by CPD. The normalization step decreases the
amplitude differences across trials, making the optimization
algorithm less prone to outliers due to artifacts. Apart from
the CPD, our results can also be influenced by the clustering
algorithm. Given the nature of k-means it is not always
optimal in finding discriminative clusters. Classifying only
on CPD components that represent the signal of interest can
increase the results for ranks >1. However, this would require
an additional (automatic) component selection step.
In summary, CPD seems to be able to, with a fairly simple
model, separate signal and noise in single trial ERP data.
Even in small near real-time datasets meaningful estimates
are derived without the need for specific training data.
Future work should focus on the identity of the derived
clusters to facilitate online BCI applications.

Figure 5: Average accuracy per subject with a rank-1 CPD model.

IV. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
The current study presented a novel way to analyze
auditory BCI data based on CPD. The benefits of CPD based
discrimination of single trial ERPs in a 3-class auditory
oddball task are shown. Even in small datasets, CPD is able
to produce meaningful estimates. Applying CPD in an
adaptive way so that it could update only the necessary
structures is expected to further increase the results. A model
initialized on only a few trials that can be updated over time
so that it allows exclusion of old data when non-stationarity
is occurring has potential for a successful zero-training
algorithm. The principal drawback of the presented approach
is the inability to identify extracted clusters without prior
label information of some trials. Our CPD approach finds
distinct clusters that could rely on either non-target or target
responses. Future work should focus on the automatic
detection of which cluster represents the target stimuli.
Addition of the known baseline trials in the CPD might solve
this issue as the non-target response should be closely related
to the baseline trials. Another solution might arise from the
analysis of the 10-trial models which showed that the most
discriminative models (80-100%) are strongly correlated to
either the target or distractor stimulus and oppositely to the
other. Incorporating the results of the second mode in the
CPD decomposition (i.e. time or frequency estimates) for
identifying the class-stimuli relation might lead to correct
labels.
Our results are moderately influenced by the initialization
of the CPD models. Finding an objective measure to handle
this instability would increase the application potential in
noisy datasets. We considered using the residual error in the
CPDs as a measure for model fitness to improve the stability.

REFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

Mihajlovic, V., Grundlehner, B., Vullers, R., & Penders, J. (2014).
Wearable, Wireless EEG Solutions in Daily Life Applications: What
are we missing? Biomedical and Health Informatics, IEEE Journal of ,
vol.PP, no.99, pp.1,1
De Vos, M., Gandras, K., & Debener, S. (2014). Towards a truly
mobile auditory brain–computer interface: Exploring the P300 to take
away. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 91(1), 46-53.
Kindermans, P. J., Schreuder, M., Schrauwen, B., Müller, K. R., &
Tangermann, M. (2014). True Zero-Training Brain-Computer
Interfacing–An Online Study. PloS one, 9(7), e102504.
Grizou, J., Iturrate, I., Montesano, L., & Oudeyer, P. Y. (2014).
Calibration-Free BCI Based Control. In Twenty-Eighth AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (No. EPFL-CONF-198763).
Kolda, T. G., & Bader, B. W. (2009). Tensor decompositions and
applications. SIAM review, 51(3), 455-500.
Vanderperren, K., Mijović, B., Novitskiy, N., Vanrumste, B., Stiers,
P., Van den Bergh, B. R., ... & De Vos, M. (2013). Single trial ERP
reading based on parallel factor analysis. Psychophysiology, 50(1),
97-110.
Debener, S., Minow, F., Emkes, R., Gandras, K., & Vos, M. (2012).
How about taking a low‐cost, small, and wireless EEG for a walk?.
Psychophysiology, 49(11), 1617-1621.
De Vos, M., Kroesen, M., Emkes, R., & Debener, S. (2014). P300
speller BCI with a mobile EEG system: comparison to a traditional
amplifier. Journal of neural engineering, 11(3), 036008.
Delorme, A., Mullen, T., Kothe, C., Acar, Z. A., Bigdely-Shamlo, N.,
Vankov, A., & Makeig, S. (2011). EEGLAB, SIFT, NFT, BCILAB,
and ERICA: new tools for advanced EEG processing. Computational
intelligence and neuroscience, 2011, 10.
De Vos, M., De Lathauwer, L., & Van Huffel, S. (2011). Spatially
constrained ICA algorithm with an application in EEG processing.
Signal Processing, 91(8), 1963-1972.
Demiralp, T., Ademoglu, A., Istefanopulos, Y., Başar-Eroglu, C., &
Başar, E. (2001). Wavelet analysis of oddball P300. International
journal of psychophysiology, 39(2), 221-227.
Harshman, R. A. (1970). Foundations of the parafac procedure:
models and conditions for an" explanatory" multimodal factor
analysis. Technical report, UCLA Working Papers in Phonetics, 1-84.
Sorber, L., Van Barel, M., & De Lathauwer, L. T. (2014).Tensorlab
v2. 0. Available online, URL: http://www. tensorlab. net.

