Current Topics in Biophysics 2016, 39 (suppl A), 29-59

DOI: 10.1515/ctb-20163-0003

Posters
BIOPHYSICS OF MOVEMENT CONTROL
A. Alaburda
aidas.alaburda@gf.vu.lt
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Vilnius University, Ciurlionio 21/27,
Vilnius, LT-03101 Lithuania

Finding food, escaping danger or mating – all these
behavior involves movement. Movement in space is
crucial for animals. Every movement should follow the
laws of physics: body and its parts should accelerate, stop,
overcome a friction and keep balance at the same time.
Animals travel distances exceeding their body size by a
few orders of magnitude. The amplitude of single
movement is comparable with the size of animal. The
strategy for traveling longer distance is to repeat the same
“elementary” single movement: step, swing etc. Even the
simple movement is produced by contraction of several
muscle groups in a precise order. This requires very fine
control involving anticipation and negative feedback. The
mechanisms and principles of movement control remains
to be elucidated.
The limb or muscle can produce a ballistic high force
generating movement. The same limb or muscle can
produce very subtle movements as well. How the control
of muscles is achieved in a very wide dynamic range?
Muscles of vertebrates are directly controlled by spinal
motoneurons. The properties of motonerons are believed
to play an important role in control of movement.
In my talk I will discuss how the activation properties
of motoneurons, investagated in our group, contributes to
the of movement control.
LOCATION OF THE RETINAL OF CHEMICALLY
AND GENETICALLY MODIFIED
BACTERIORHODOPSIN: FLUORESCENCE
RESONANCE ENERGY TRANSFER STUDY
K. Bryl1, K. Yoshihara2

location in BR result from specific retinal-opsin
interaction and may influence retinal position in the
photocycle intermediates. It is also supposed that this
specific interaction is affected by chemical structure of
chromophore and opsin functionally important amino
acids. The aim of our study was to clarify the influence of
the retinal chemical structure and Asp-96 of opsin on the
chromophore location in BRground state and in redshifted, O-like intermediate.
The technique of incorporation of retinal analogues
with changed shape or altered electronic properties into
the binding site of bR (or mutant bR) was used to
strengthen the influence of the protein surrounding. The
experiments were performed with wild-type and D96Nmutated bR carrying retinal or 8-, 10-, 14-Fluororetinal.
Distances from fluorescent lipid probes RhB18, DPH,
DiI, 2-AP, 16-AP to the retinal chromophore of BR
incorporated into phospholipid vesicles were measured
with fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET).
Steady-state fluorescence was used to find the closest
approach from probes to ground-state retinal. Phase
modulation of FRET was used to find distances for retinal
in bacteriorhodopsin’s red-shifted, O-like intermediates.
It is demonstrated that both modification of retinal
chemical structure and genetic modification of opsin
(substitution of aspartic acid with asparagine at 96
position) may influence chromophore location in BR.
Results show that retinal is buried more deeply in the
modified BR than in native BR. The biggest changes in
retinal position were observed for 14-Fluororetinal
suggesting that environment close to chromophore
linkage with protein plays significant role in retinal
location in BR. Retinal is buried more deeply in the
protein when BR is in its ground state than in red-shifted,
O-like intermediates. Presented results support earlier
assumptions that the retinal chemical property and the
shape of protein pocket influence the location of retinal in
BRgroud state and in the intermediates of BR photocycle.
The problem whether the starting retinal location in
BRgroud state is significant for BR physiological activity
will be also discussed.

1

Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Warmia and
Mazury in Olsztyn, Poland,
2
Suntory Institute for Bioorganic Research (SUNBOR),
Osaka, Japan.

Bacteriorhodopsin (BR), the retinal-opsin complex
present in the purple membrane of Halobacterium
salinarum, undergoes light-driven cyclic reactions
resulting in protons transport across the membrane. To
elucidate the molecular mechanism of proton pumping,
changes in the location and orientation of retinal during
the photocycle [BRground state → intermediates
(K→L→M→N→O) → BRground state] must be
determined.
It is supposed that the starting retinal configuration and

UTERINE BIOELECTRICAL ACTIVITY –
REVIEW OF MEASUREMENTS METHODS
E. Brzozowska, E. Oczeretko, M. Borowska
1

Bialystok University of Technology, Faculty of Mechanical
Engineering, Department of Materials and Biomedical Engineering,
Wiejska 45C, 15-351 Bialystok, Poland

The study of uterine contractile activity is crucial for both
diagnosis, treatment and prevention of premature birth.
Efficient assessment of uterine contractions in women is
difficult from a technical point of view and still requires

30

Posters

research.
Currently used measurement methods are indirect and
do not allow to fully observe the dynamics of muscle
contraction of the uterus. Direct measurement of the
pressure in the wall of the uterus is unattainable except for
special cases. Examination of the uterine electrical
activity associated with its mechanical activity by means
of implants placed on myometrium is possible only in
animals [1]. The mechanisms underlying the premature
release of uterine contractions and consequently preterm
labor is unknown.
The recording of changes of myometrium electrical
potentials is called electrohysterography (EHG - uterine
electromyography). There are a few limitations of EHG.
There are difficulties to reliably measure muscle activity
caused by variable skin resistance and variable distance to
muscles (fetal shifts) [2]. However, its great advantage is
non-invasiveness and ease of use applying telemetry.
The magnetic field activity corresponds to uterine
electrophysiological activity. Unlike uterine EMG signals,
MMG signals are detectable outside the boundary of the
skin without making electrical contact with the body.
Unlike electrical recordings, the magnetic recordings are
independent of any kind of reference, thus ensuring that
each sensor mainly records localized activity. For the
magnetic recordings each sensor mainly records localized
activity. This makes measurements with even 151 sensors
[3] possible.
EHG has practical clinical importance in diagnosing
preterm labour. Our study showed the differences in the
bioelectrical uterine activity in patients with symptoms of
preterm labor, who delivered within 7 days, and a group
of patients who delivered after 7 days [4].

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the financial support by Faculty
of Mechanical Engineering, Bialystok University of
Technology (MB/WM/XX/2016).

STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS OF PROTEINS
INVOLVED IN miRNA MEDIATED GENE
SILENCING
M. K. Cieplak-Rotowska1, K. Tarnowski2, M. Dadlez2,
M. R. Fabian3, N. Sonenberg4, A. Niedźwiecka1,5
1

Division of Biophysics, Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of
Physics, University of Warsaw, Poland
2
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Warsaw, Poland
3
Department of Oncology, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Canada
4
Department of Biochemistry and McGill Cancer Centre, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada
5
Laboratory of Biological Physics, Institute of Physics, Polish Academy
of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

miRNAs are short RNA sequences, that usually silence
the expression of mRNAs with almost perfectly
complementary miRNA-binding sites in their 3’UTRs.
These miRNAs guide Argonaute proteins to targeted
mRNA. Argonautes, in turn, interact with GW182
proteins. GW182 recruits the CCR4-NOT deadenylase
complex via interactions with i.a. the scaffolding subunit
CNOT1 [1,2]. This brings about inhibition of translation
and/or mRNA deadenylation and further decay.
Structural dynamics of the GW182 and CNOT1
proteins as well as interactions with a short peptide
coresponding the CNOT1-binding site were studied using
hydrogen-deuterium exchange coupled with ion mobility
mass spectrometry (HDX-IMS). HDX-MS technique
allows studies of solvent accessibility of particular protein
regions that depends on structural properties of a protein
and on the presence of a binding partner.
We will present the results describing structural
properties of the GW182 silencing domain and the
CNOT1 fragment interacting with this domain, as well as
the results of the HDX-IMS studies of the CNOT1
interactions with a tristetraprolin peptide (TTP), a
fragment of a protein involved in suppression of
inflammatory processes.

REFERENCES
[1] Brzozowska E., Oczeretko E., Pawliński B. & Gajewski, Z.
(2014). Telemetry Recording of the Electromyographic
Activity of Female Reproduction Tract. [In:] Piętka E.,
Kawa J., Więcławek W. (eds.) Information Technologies in
Biomedicine, Springer International Publishing ,pp.101112.
[2] DAY, S., Important factors in surface EMG measurement.
Bortec Biomedical Ltd publishers, 1-17, 2002.
[3] Govindan, R. B., Siegel, E., Mckelvey, S., Murphy, P.,
Lowery, C. L., & Eswaran, H. (2014). Tracking the changes
in synchrony of the electrophysiological activity as the
uterus approaches labor using magnetomyographic
technique. Reprod Sci, 22, 595-601.
[4] Lemancewicz A. , Borowska M, Paweł Kuć P., Jasińska E.,
Laudański P., Laudański T. & Oczeretko E. (2016). Early
diagnosis
of
threatened
premature
labor
by
electrohysterographic recordings – The use of digital signal
processing, Biocybern Biomed Eng, 36, 302-307.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the European Regional
Development Fund through the Foundation for Polish
Science International PhD Projects Programme and the
Innovative
Economy
Operational
Programme
POIG.02.02.00-00-025/09 NanoFun.

REFERENCES
[1] Fabian M. R., Cieplak M. K., Frank F., Morita M., Green J.,
Srikumar T., Nagar B., Yamamoto T., Raught B., Duchaine
T. F., Sonenberg N. (2011). miRNA-mediated
deadenylation is orchestrated by GW182 through two
conserved motifs that interact with CCR4-NOT. Nat Struct
Mol Biol. 18, 1211-7.
[2] Braun J. E., Huntzinger E., Fauser M., Izaurralde E. (2011).
GW182 proteins directly recruit cytoplasmic deadenylase

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
complexes to miRNA targets. Mol. Cell 44, 120–33.

COMPARISON OF THE INFLUENCE OF
SELECTED BROMINATED FLAME
RETARDANTS ON HEMOLYSIS AND ERYPTOSIS
IN HUMAN ERYTHROCYTES

31

REFERENCES
[1] Eljarrat
E.,
Barceló
D. Brominated
flame
retardants. Springer Science & Business Media.
2011:vol.16;
[2] Covaci A., Voorspoels S., Abdallah M. A. E., Geens T.,
Harrad S., Law R. J.: Analytical and environmental aspects
of the flame retardant tetrabromobisphenol-A and its
derivatives. J Chromatogr A. 2009;1216(3):346–363;

M. Cyrkler, B. Bukowska
1

Department of Environmental Pollution Biophysics,
Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection,
University of Łódź, Pomorska 141/143 St., 90-001 Łódź, Poland

Flame retardants are the compounds of anthropogenic
origin that are used to reduce flammability and burning
rate of polymeric materials.
Brominated flame retardants (BFRs) are up to 25% of
the market of flame retardants. Due to the fact that the
main component of these substances is bromine, and there
are no limitations according to their structure, this group
covers above 80 various chemicals.
BFRs can be divided into two groups containing three
commercial mixtures, such as additive compounds, which
include pentabromodiphenyl ethers (PBDE) and
hexabromocyclododecane (HBCD) as well as reactive
compounds, which include tetrabromobisphenol A
(TBBPA). The compounds from the first group are mixed
with other components of the polymeric material during,
before or after polyreactions, which enables migration of
these substances into the environment. Reactive
compounds are bound into the polymer chain during
polymerization reaction, which limits the migration of
these substances into the environment [1]. Among the
group
of
brominated
flame
retardants,
tetrabromobisphenol A is produced in the highest amounts
[2].
The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of the
most commonly used brominated flame retardants
(BFRs),
i.e.
terabromobisphenol
A
(TBBPA),
tetrabromobisphenol S (TBBPS), pentabromophenol
(PBP), 2,4-dibromophenol (2,4-DBP) and 2,4,6tribromophenol (2,4,6-TBP) on the level of hemolysis and
eryptosis in human red blood cells. In order to analyze
hemolysis, the erythrocytes were incubated with BFRs in
the concentrations ranging from 0.01 to 500 μg/ml for 24
h, 48 h or 72 h. Eryptotic changes were assessed in red
blood cells incubated with BFRs in the concentrations
range from 1 to 250 μg/ml for 48 h (the concentrations of
bisphenols and incubation time were selected on the basis
of the results obtained for hemolytic changes). Eryptosis
(phosphatidylserine translocation) was analyzed by flow
cytometry using annexin V conjugated with fluorescein
isothiocyanate. The results showed that BFRs revealed
cytotoxic and eryptotic potential in red blood cells. It was
also observed that TBBPA exhibited the strongest, while
TBBPS the lowest changes in the parameter studied. The
observed changes were caused by BFRs in the
concentrations, which may only affect human body as a
result of acute poisoning with these substances.

STUDIES OF THE THERMOTROPIC PHASE
PROPERTIES OF BINARY MIXTURE OF DPPC
AND NEW ACETYLENIC DERIVATE OF BETULIN
G. Czernel1, M. Arczewska1, E. Bębenek2, E.
Chrobak2, M. Szymanek3, S. Boryczka2, M. Gagoś4
1

Department of Biophysics, University of Life Sciences in Lublin,
Lublin, Poland
2
Department of Organic Chemistry, School of Pharmacy with Division
of Laboratory Medicine in Sosnowiec, Medical University of Silesia in
Katowice, Sosnowiec, Poland
3
Department of Agricultural Machines Theory, University of Life
Sciences in Lublin, Lublin, Poland
4
Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology and Biotechnology,
Maria Curie-Skłodowska University, Lublin, Poland

Betulin is one of the organic compounds from the group
of triterpenes pentacyclic lupane type. Betulin has a broad
spectrum
of
biological
activities
such
as
immunostimulatory,
antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory.
However, the most important is its anticancer effects. The
discovery of the selective influence of betulin on cancer
cells without damaging healthy cells, contributed to begin
research on modifying the structure of betulin to obtain
compounds with more favorable pharmacological
properties [1].
Differential scanning calorimetry was used to
investigate the thermotropic phase properties of binary
mixture of lipid and betulin derivative containing
pharmacophore bearing an acetylenic function. These
compounds have been synthesized at the Department of
Organic Chemistry, Medical University of Silesia in
Katowice [1-2]. All new compounds, as well as betulin,
were tested in vitro for their antiproliferative activity.
Most of the compounds showed better cytotoxicity than
betulin and cisplatin used as reference agent [1].
In this paper we analyzed influence of betulin and its
acetylenic derivate on the fluidity of liposome lipid
bilayers being synthetic analogues of natural membranes.
Incorporation of betulin into the lipid bilayers produces
broadening of the phase transition with a decrease main
transition temperature (Tm) of DPPC. In the case of
betulin derivative were observed even greater decrease in
temperature Tm and the disappearance of the pretransition
peak (Tp).
The degree of biological membranes fluidity plays a
key role in the course of most physiological processes.
Also, in many disease states, e.g cancers, membrane
fluidity is disturbed. These studies may contribute to a
better understanding of the mechanism of action of
betulin and its derivatives.

32

Posters
REFERENCES

[1] S. Boryczka, E. Bębenek, J. Wietrzyk, K. Kępińska, M.
Jastrzębska, J. Kusz, M. Nowak, Synthesis, structure and
cytotoxic activity of new acetylenic derivatives of betulin,
Molecules 18 (2013) 4526-4543.
[2] E. Bębenek, E. Chrobak, J. Wietrzyk, M. Kadela, A.
Chrobak, J. Kusz ,M. Książek, M. Jastrzębska, S. Boryczka,
Synthesis, structure and cytotoxic activity of acetylenic
derivatives of betulonic and betulinic acids. Journal of
Molecular Structure 1106 (2016) 210-219

ROSE BENGAL-PHOSPHORUS DENDRIMER
COMPLEX FOR ENHANCED PHOTOTOXICITY
AGAINST BASAL CELL CARCINOMA CELL
LINES

cationic phosphorus dendrimer of third generation was an
excellent candidate for improving photodynamic therapy
using rose bengal.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was funded by the project operated within
the Foundation for Polish Science VENTURES
Programme
(Project
VENTURES
number
VENTURES/2013-11/3) co-financed by the EU European
Regional Development Fund and by the grant
HARMONIA no. UMO-2013/08/M/NZ1/00761 supported
by National Science Centre. Murine basal cell carcinoma
cell lines were kindly provided by dr Ervin Epstein
(Children’s Hospital Oakland Research Institute).

M. Dabrzalska1, A. Janaszewska1, J. P. Majoral2,3,
B. Klajnert-Maculewicz1,4

AGGREGATION OF ENCHANCED GREEN
FLUORESCENT PROTEIN (EGFP) DURING
FOLDING MONITORED BY ANALYTICAL
ULTRACENTRIFUGATION

1
Department of General Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and
Environmental Protection, University of Lodz, Pomorska 141/143, 90236 Lodz, Poland
2
Laboratoire de Chimie de Coordination CNRS, 205 route de Narbonne,
31077 Toulouse, France
3
Université de Toulouse, UPS, INPT, 31077, Toulouse Cedex 4, France
4
Leibniz-Institut für Polymerforschung Dresden e.V., Hohe Strasse 6,
01069 Dresden, Germany

Dendrimers have proven to act as efficient platforms for
different molecules such as anticancer drugs, imaging
agents or nucleic acids. Their potential is strictly based on
their unique, dendritic architecture, which provides high
loading capacity and possibility of both covalent and noncovalent interactions with active molecules. Some studies
have been also focused on dendrimers as carriers of
photosensitizers used in photodynamic therapy (PDT).
The need for improvement of PDT is related to specific
limitations of photosensitizers. Among others, PDT
is imited due to poor selectivity, hydrophobicity
of photosensitizers and prolonged light sensitivity. Those
issues may be resolved by using a drug delivery system
for photosensitizers based on dendrimers.
The aim of our study was to evaluate whether
a phosphorus dendrimer has a potential as a carrier of a
photosensitizer (rose bengal). Spectrofluorimetric studies
revealed that dendrimer was able to interact with rose
bengal molecules and that the rose bengal-dendrimer
complex was formed via electrostatic interactions. A
stoichiometry of the complex was determined and a 5:1
(rose bengal:dendrimer) molar ratio was chosen for
further studies. In order to evaluate the influence of the
dendrimer on singlet oxygen production by irradiating
rose bengal the Singlet Oxygen Sensor Green was used.
In comparison with a free photosensitizer, the complex
showed remarkably high singlet oxygen production. We
chose three basal cell carcinoma cell lines as suitable
biological models for studying a photodynamic effect in
vitro. The rose bengal-dendrimer complex showed higher
cellular uptake compared to free rose bengal and next, it
showed an enhanced phototoxicity against all three basal
cell carcinoma cell lines. Hence, we demonstrated that the

A. Dawidziak1, J. Krasowska1, A. Bzowska1,
P. L. Clark2, B. Wielgus-Kutrowska1
1

2

Division of Biophysics, Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw,
Warsaw, Poland
Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN USA

Matured monomeric GFP possess unique chromophore
created after proper folding, which excited at 489 nm
emits green fluorescence. The protein is non-toxic and
does not participate in the biochemical reaction in cells.
Because of that GFP and its mutants become well know
biological markers used in molecular biology,
biochemistry and medicine [1]. After maturation GFP is
very stable, but during folding (also when it is fused and
co-expressed together with other proteins) is prone to
aggregation.
We have observed the aggregation accompanying the
folding of EGFP (enchanced green fluorescent protein,
mutant of GFP) purified form inclusion bodies [2] in
buffer with 6M Guanidinium Hydrochloride (GdnHCl).
The folding was initiated by dilution of the sample in
buffers with lower concentration of denaturant. During
reduction of GdnHCl concentration we have observed the
aggregation (accompanied folding) of the protein on
different stage of folding. By the help of analytical
ultracentrifugation we have monitored the amount and
size of EGFP aggregates as a function of time and
GdnHCl concentration. The absorption detection at 280
nm allows to observe monomeric and aggregated EGFP,
the absorption at 488 nm allows to observe the molecules
with matured chromophore and the more sensitive
fluorescence detection allows to detect the molecules with
functional chromophore.
The results show that in the high concentration of
GdnHCl (3-6 M) protein remains unfolded and the
aggregation is not observed. In the middle (1-2 M)

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
concentration, EGFP aggregates are slowly created. The
aggregation accelerates in low concentration of
denaturant. The aggregates became huge and fast
sedimenting, especially in 0.1M GdnHCl. The
fluorescence detection shows that fluoresce mainly stable
monomers, while the conglomerates of EGFP molecules
are non-fluorescent.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Polish Ministry of Science
and Higher Education, No. BST 173300/BF. The
analytical ultracentrifugation was performed in the
NanoFun laboratories co-financed by the European
Regional Development Fund within the Innovation
Economy Operational Programme, Project No.
POIG.02.02.00-00-025/09.

33

excimer fluorescence (λmax. ~ 480 nm) at acidic pH,
whereas pH increasing caused i-motif unfolding followed
by stem destabilization and pyrene separation (λmax. ~ 400
nm) [5]. Later, we have investigated the influence of 6
base pairs stem composition onto pH working range of
37-mer MBs with i-motif in the loop [data not published].
In presented approach, we have modified our MBs by
replacement of 2-deoxycytidine in a loop with its
fluorescent analogue tC (1,3-diaza-2-oxophenothiazine)
or tC° (1,3-diaza-2-oxophenoxazine) [6]. We performed
the spectral characterization of 37-mer MBs in the various
pH solution by using UV-vis, CD and fluorescence
measurements. The pH-induced i-motif formation in the
loop of MBs resulted in fluorescence quenching of tC or
tC° fluorophore, which is in agreement with our previous
studies [7]. Suitability of these sensors for monitoring pH
changes was also demonstrated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
REFERENCES
[1] Enterina J.R., Wu L., & Campbell R.E. (2015) Emerging
fluorescent protein technologies. Curr Opin Chem Biol. 27,
10-17.
[2] Krasowska J., Olasek M., Bzowska A., Clark P.L. &
Wielgus-Kutrowska B. (2010) The comparison of
aggregation and folding of enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) by spectroscopic studies. Spectroscopy 24,
343-348.

MOLECULAR BEACONS DEDICATED TO pH
SENSING
A. Dembska, P. Bielecka, B. Juskowiak
Laboratory of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Adam
Mickiewicz University, Umultowska 89b, 61-614 Poznań, Poland; Email: aniojka@amu.edu.pl

Traditional molecular beacons (MBs) are hairpin-shaped
dual-labeled
oligonucleotide
probes
that
emit
fluorescence upon hybridization to an RNA or DNA target
sequences. Their loops serve as recognition elements and
consist of 15 to 25 nucleotides, whereas their stems are
only 5 to 7 nucleotides long. In design proposed by Tyagi
and Kramer, the stem termini are labeled with reporter
groups (a quencher and a fluorophore) that are responsible
for analytical signal production [1]. Other approaches of
MBs contain systems functionalized by one or multiple
fluorophores located anywhere in the sequence and give
analytical signal based on FRET as well as on excimer
fluorescence [2].
The principal goal of our research is the development of
the fluorescent pH sensors based on MBs containing
cytosine-rich sequences. The sequences including tracts
of cytosine are able to switch from a random coil to a
folded i-motif in response to pH decreasing [3].
Therefore, we inserted the C4GC4GC4GC4TA fragment
from RET proto-oncogene [4] into a loop of pyrene
functionalized MB; as consequence our system exhibited

This research was supported by the research grant no.
2015/17/B/ST4/03627 from the National Science Center
(NCN) of Poland.
REFERENCES
[1] Tyagi, S.; Kramer, F. R. Nat. Biotech. 1996, 14, 303-308.
[2] Tan, W.; Wang, K. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2004, 8(5), 547553.
[3] Brooks, T. A.; Kendrick, S.; Hurley, L. FEBS J. 2010, 277
(17), 3459-3469.
[4] Guo, K.; Pourpak, A.; Beetz-Rogers, K.; Gokhale, V.; Sun,
D.; Hurley, L.H. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2007, 129, 1022010228.
[5] Dembska, A.; Juskowiak, B. Spectrochim. Acta A: Mol.
Biomol. Spectrosc. 2015, 150, 928-933.
[6] Preus, S.; Kilsa, K.; Wilhelmsson, L.M.; Albinsson, B.
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2010, 12, 8881–8892.
[7] Bielecka, P.; Juskowiak, B. Molecules 2015, 20, 1851118525.

THERMOTOLERANCE OF HUMAN
ERYTHROCYTES INDUCED BY NEAR INFRARED
RADIATION (NIR)
P. Duchnowicz1, M. Witczak1,
M. Komorowska2, M. Koter-Michalak1
1

Department of Environmental Pollution Biophysics, Faculty of Biology,
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland
2
Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Instrumentation, Wroclaw
University of Technology, Wroclaw, Poland

Thermotolerance is defined as a phenomenon involving
the acquisition of resistance to elevated temperature for
cell, tissue or organism, which is caused as a result of the
pretreatment thermal shock, physical or chemical agents.
It is a temporary phenomenon, and the period of cell
resistance to elevated temperatures depends on the cell
type, temperature and duration of the first thermal shock,

34

Posters

and the time interval between the first and second thermal
shock.
In erythrocytes – cells without intracellular structures –
a key role in the acquisition of resistance to elevated
temperatures plays the cell membrane.
The viability of erythrocytes critical temperature is
46°C. Above this temperature are observed irreversible
changes in the erythrocyte proteins which lead to cell
death.
In this study development of thermotolerance induced
by fractioned heating or by NIR was determined by
hemolysis of the erythrocytes, the osmotic resistance and
ATPase activity.
A
B
C
D

44°C (15 min)
or 5, 10, 15 min NIR

37°C X h (X = 0.5, 1, 3 h)

48.5°C (30 min)
Experimental conditions
Pre-incubation of erythrocytes at 44°C results in the
acquisition of resistance to second thermal shock
(48.5°C). Maximum this phenomenon is observed after 3
hours of incubation at 37°C between thermal shocks, and
disappeared after 7 hours.
Erythrocytes treated NIR were resistant to the second
heat shock (48.5°C). In this study used three exposure
times: 5, 10 and 15 minutes. Maximum of
thermotolerance was dependent on time exposure to NIR.
At the longest time exposure (15 minutes)
thermotolerance effect reaches a maximum after 1 hour
incubation at 37°C prior to the second thermal shock
(48.5°C) and for the shortest time exposure (5 min) effect
reaches a maximum after 3 hours.
Based on the obtained results it can be concluded that the
thermotolerance phenomenon in erythrocytes depends on
the energy supplied during the first heat shock or
exposure to NIR.

of physical properties of urinary stones still interesting. In
particular, new perspectives offered by laser lithotripsy
show a necessity to learn more about thermal stability of
the urinary calculi. The main objective of this work was
to examine the relationship between the chemical
composition of kidney stones and their physical stability
in terms of mechanical and thermodynamic properties.
Fragments of freshly removed urinary stones from
patients operated due to urolithiasis were subject to
standard chemical analyses. Other fragments of the same
stones were subjected to Raman spectroscopy,
compression to failure and differential scanning
calorimetry (DSC) in temperatures from 60oC to 350oC.
Basing on Raman spectra, main mineral components of
the calculi were identified and the high percentage of twocomponent stones was proved. Calcium oxalate (COMmonohydrate and COD-dihydrate) was found to be the
predominant component in 68% of the calculi examined,
hydroxyapatite (HAP) in 18%, uric acid (UA) in 9%, and
struvite (MAPH) in 5%. The strength was of COM calculi
was significantly higher than others.
Processes of thermal decomposition were observed on
DSC thermograms in all urinary stones even though HAP
and UA crystals melt in temperatures higher than the
range applied in the experiment. A peak temperature of
the main thermal process correlated with the mechanical
strength of the stones. The peak temperatures for three
main mineral types of the calculi (COM, HAP and UA)
were
significantly
different.
Nonetheless,
the
thermograms revealed a complex structure of
disintegration of calculi which was not directly related to
their mineral composition. So, some of thermal processes
taking place temperatures up to 250°C were attributed to
disintegration of glycosaminoglycans and other organic
components of the stones. The more so that particular
glycosaminoglycans were identified in the Raman spectra
of the calculi under investigation.
In conclusion, the DSC analysis allowed for obtaining
temperature limits of disintegration of particular types of
urinary stones, and showed that physical stability of the caluli
was affected not only by their mineral composition, but also, to
a great extent, by presence of glycosaminoglycans that “glue”
the crystals of mineral together.

THERMAL STABILITY OF URINARY STONES
IN RELATION TO CHEMICAL COMPOSITION
AND MECHANICAL STRENGTH

ELECTRON PARAMAGNETIC RESONANCE
(EPR) SPECTROSCOPY STUDIES OF THE
MYCOTOXIN-STIMULATION OF RADICAL
SPECIES IN WHEAT

W. Dyś1, H. Trębacz2, M. Szymańska-Chargot3,
A. Zdunek3

M. Filek1, M. Łabanowska2, M. Kurdziel2,
A. Sieprawska3

Oddział Urologiczny, Szpital Specjalistyczny w Puławach, Polska
Department of Biophysics, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin,
Poland
3
Department of Microstructure and Mechanics of Biomaterials, Institute
of Agrophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences , Lublin, Poland
1

2

In spite of numerous studies relating to mechanical
strength of urinary calculus, a need to continuous
improvement of extracorporeal lithotripsy makes the issue

1

Institute of Plant Physiology Polish Academy of Science,
Niezapominajek 21, 30-239 Kraków, Poland
2
Faculty of Chemistry, Jagiellonian University, Ingardena 3;
30-060 Krakow, Poland
3
Institute of Biology, Pedagogical University Podchorążych 2,
30-084 Krakow, Poland

One of the main active mycotoxin produced by pathogens
of the Fusarium groups is zearalenone (ZEA) which is

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
responsible for damages of plant cells. Protective
mechanisms against free oxygen radicals generated in
stress include the possibility of their “deactivation” by
organic molecules acting as specific electron traps [1].
Difference in such radicals generation may serve as
indicator of stress intensity and genotype-tolerance to
stress action. In presented studies the ZEA influence on
the creation of organic radicals and changes in the
behaviour of metal species were investigated in wheat
genotypes (tolerant and sensitive) by EPR method.
Moreover, the effects of selenium ions (Se) and 24epibrassinolid (BR), as potential protective substances
against ZEA, were analyzed in terms of radicals
generation.
In investigated samples (control and ZEA, BR and Se
treated), EPR spectra (recorded at 77 K) revealed the
presence of signals originating from Fe(III), Mn(II) and
organic radicals. The signal with g = 2.00, exhibiting HFS
structure (A = 9.2 mT), was ascribed to Mn species,
whereas broad signal with g in the range 2.40 – 2.60 was
attributed to Fe(III) bonded to proteins, probably situated
in the ferritin protein shell. The line of small intensity, at g
= 4.30, was connected with non hem high spin Fe(III).
Analysis of Mn(II) signal indicated that it had originated
from dipole-dipole interacting manganese ions in protein
structures and from isolated Mn(II) aqua complexes.
Upon interaction with ZEA and ZEA+BR, the intensities
of Fe(III) and Mn(II) signals decreased, whereas the
addition of Se to samples containing ZEA inhibited this
decrease. In comparison with transition metal ions
spectra, the intensity of organic radical signals was very
low, however, contrary to metal ion signals, it increased in
spectra of samples containing ZEA and ZEA+BR and
decreased upon addition of Se to samples comprising
ZEA. The influence of above mentioned compounds on
the intensity of EPR signals showed that Se action was
more effective than BR against ZEA toxicity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported
2014/15/B/NZ9/02192.

by NCN

project No

REFERENCES
[1] Łabanowska M., Filek M., Kurdziel M., Bidzinska E.,
Miszalski Z., Hartikainen H. (2013). EPR spectroscopy as a
tool for investigation of differences in radical status in
wheat plants of various tolerances to osmotic stress induced
by NaCl and PEG-treatment. J. Plant Physiol., 170,136-145

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CELLULAR
STRUCTURE AND BLACKSPOT
SUSCEPTIBILITY OF POTATO TUBER
PARENCHYMA TISSUE AFTER LONG TERM OF
STORAGE

35

M. Gancarz, A. Nawrocka, R. Rusinek, A. Miś,
Z. Niewiadomski
Department of Physical Properties of Plant Materials, Institute of
Agrophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Doswiadczalna 4,
20-290 Lublin, Poland.

Mechanical injuries are the main cause of damage and
loss of quality of plant raw materials. Potatoes are
susceptible to external and internal pressures, which cause
bruising and fracture in soft tissues. The paper shows
research concerning the relationship between geometrical
parameters of the microstructure of potato tuber tissue and
susceptibility of potatoes to blackspot damage after six
months of storage. Twenty eight potato varieties from
2011 and 2012 crops in Poland were used in the
experiment. The tubers had a similar size and shape [1].
Each tuber was undergone mechanical effects by Constant
Height Multiple Impacts technique [2]. A confocal
microscope was used to study the microstructure of soft
tissue in potato tubers and microscope images of the
perimedullary zone of the tissue were analyzed [3].
Cylinder shape samples of 1 mm thickness and 10 mm
diameter were taken from the outer core of a potato tuber
[4]. Obtained microscope images were put to analysis.
The blackspot index (BIP), which describes potato
susceptibility to blackspot damage, was calculated in
accordance with the methodology described by
Baumgartner et al., [5]. As a result of the experiment
parameters of a size flat section were assigned area A and
perimeter P for all researches and susceptible to damage’s
blackspot.
The study shows that there is a correlation between the
size of perimedullary tissue cells in potato tubers and
blackspot damage. Potato tubers with smaller cells of the
perimedullary zone show higher susceptibility to
blackspot damage, described by the blackspot index BIP,
in comparison with potatoes with larger cells which were
stored for six months.

REFERENCES
[1] Gancarz M., Konstankiewicz K. (2007). Application of
computer image analysis for fast determination of size and
shape of potato tubers (in Polish). Acta Agrophysica, 10 (1),
47-57.
[2] Bajema R.W., Hyde G.M. (1998). Instrumented pendulum
for impact characterization of whole fruit and vegetable
speci mens. Trans. ASAE, 41(5): 1399–1405.
[3] Konstankiewicz K., Czachor H., Gancarz M., Król A.,
Pawlak K., Zdunek A. (2002). Cell structural parameters of
potato tuber tissue. Int. Agrophysics, 16, 2, 119-127.
[4] Gancarz M., Konstankiewicz K., Zgórska K. (2014). Cells
orientation of potato tuber parenchyma tissue. Int.
Agrophysics, 28, 1, 15-22.
[5] Baumgartner M., Keller E.R., Schwendimann F. (1983).
Versuch einer Charakteriesierung von blaustabilität und
blaulabilität bei der kartoffel durch knolleneigenschaften.
Potato Res. 26, 15-30.

36

Posters

CROSS-LINKING OF PECTINS (SODIUM
CARBONATE FRACTION) BY DIVALENT METAL
IONS: A CASE STUDY ON ZINC IONS

THE COMPARISON OF REVERAROL AND
PICEATANNOL EFFECT ON NEUROBLASTOMA
CELLS

D. Ganczarenko, J. Cybulska, A. Zdunek

J. Gerszon, A. Walczak, A. Rodacka, M. Puchala

Department of Microstructure and Mechanics of Biomaterials, Institute
of Agrophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Doświadczalna 4, 20290 Lublin, Poland

Division of Radiobiology, Department of Molecular Biophysics,
Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection, University of Lodz,
ul. Pomorska 141/143, 90-238 Lodz, Poland

Pectins belong to group of polysaccharides localized in
the middle lamella and the primary cell walls of higher
plants [1]. One of the most important property of pectins
is binding ability of divalent metal ions, for example
calcium ions. Mechanism of gel formation is explained
with “egg-box” model [2]. Formation of junction zones is
related to the interactions between calcium ions and nonesterified galacturonic acid residues [3]. Stability and
strength of junction zones depend on number and
distribution of adjacent non-esterified galacturonic acid
units. It can be assumed that other divalent metal ions
bind to galacturonic acid residues of pectin chain
according to “egg-box” model. The aim of this study was
to evaluate an assembly mechanism (gelling) of the
sodium carbonate extracted pectins (DASP) with metal
ions, in this case zinc ions were considered. The
mechanism were studied with rheological methods and
FT-IR methods. On the basis of rheology measurements
an increase of viscosity of pectin solutions with addition
of zinc ions compared to pectin solution without these
ions (the control) was observed. These solutions are
pseudoplastic fluids. Analysis of the FT-IR spectra
showed differences in the intensity and positions of bands
in zinc ions-pectins system in comparison with the
control. These results may indicate effective cross-linking
of pectins by zinc ions that suggests assembly mechanism
similar to the egg-box model. This result will be verified
through computational modeling (density functional
theory and molecular dynamics).

Polyphenols are known as a “multiple effects
compounds” with limitless possibilities. Especially the
principal representative of polyphenols - resveratrol has
become the subject of intensive research over the past two
decades owing to its outstanding pharmacological
properties [1]. However its specify problem with rapid
metabolism and low bioavailability limits its application.
Therefore it’s highly important to examine its metabolites
effect. In laboratory assays as well as in vivo, differences
in hydrophilicity/lipophilicity caused by metabolic
modifications such as the addition of hydroxyl group or
glucuronyl or sulfate would be predicted to have a huge
impact on biochemical activities, inter alia due to
differences in the ability to enter cells by permeating the
cellular membrane. One of the major product of
resveratrol metabolism formed in liver via cytochrome
P450
enzymes
is
piceatannol
(3,5,3',4'tetrahydroxystilbene).
Extending knowledge about its properties opens up new
possibilities for the prevention and treatment of a many
diseases. In order to recommend these natural compounds
as a drugs it’s necessary to validate it’s diverging roles in
different cell types. Therefore the aim of this research was
to determinate the effect of piceatannol and resveratrol on
neuroblastoma cells. Furthermore, it’s extremely
important to assess its role in counteracting oxidative
stress. As it has been established, oxidative stress has
been implicated in a number of neurodegenerative
diseases The most frequently formed reactive oxygen
species (ROS) are superoxide and hydroxyl radicals and
hydrogen peroxide, all of which are generated in many
redox processes in the human body. Therefore, we also
evaluate the effects of piceatannol and resveratrol on cells
under oxidative stress conditions induced by H2O2. The
influence on cell viability and cellular apoptosis was
determined in Neuro-2a cells exposed to a various range
of piceatannol or resveratrol concentrations (2.5-50 µM).
Cells were subjected to polyphenols action for 6 hours
and afterwards incubated with hydrogen peroxide (25
µM) for 24 hours.
Picetannol exerts cytotoxic effects to Neuro-2a cells to
a greater extent than resveratrol [2]. Contrary, under
oxidative stress conditions, piceatannol protects cells
from H2O2-inudced injury, resveratrol intensifies
impairment.

1

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by the National Science
Centre. Poland DEC-2015/17/b/NZ9/03589

REFERENCES
[1] Schols, H. A., & Voragen, A. G. J. (2002). The chemical
structure of pectins. In: Seymour, G. B., & Knox, J. P.
(Eds.). Pectins and their Manipulation. Blackwell
Publishing, Oxford, 1–29.
[2] Fang, Y., Al-Assaf, S., Phillips, G. O., Nishinari, K.,
Funami, T., & Williams, P. A. (2008). Binding behavior of
calcium to polyuronates: Comparison of pectin with
alginate. Carbohydrate Polymers, 72, 334–341.
[3] Ngouémazong, D. E., Tengweh, F. F., Fraeye, I., Duvetter,
T., Cardinaels, R., Van Loey, A., Moldenaers,P.,&
Hendrickx, M. (2012). Effect of de-methylesterification on
network development and nature of Ca2+-pectin gels:
Towards understanding structure-function relations of
pectin. Food Hydrocolloids, 26, 89–98.

REFERENCES
[1] Gerszon J. Rodacka A. Puchała M. (2014). Antioxidant
properties of resveratrol and its protective effects in
neurodegenerative diseases. Advances in Cell Biology. 4

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
(2), 97-117.
[2] Gerszon J. Rodacka A. (2016). Determination of Transresveratrol Action on Two Different Types of Neuronal
Cells, Neuroblastoma and Hippocampal Cells. Czech
Journal Food Science, 34, (2): 118–126.

PREPARATION AND STUDY OF THE RELEASE
OF SILVER NANOPARTICLES FROM
DIFFERENT TYPES OF SKINCARE
FORMULATIONS
B. Grobelna1, A. Synak2, P. Bojarski2, E. Szczepańska1,
A. Bielicka-Giełdoń1

37

REFERENCES
[1] El-Kheshen, A.A., El-Rab, S.F. (2012). Effect of reducing
and protecting agents on size of silver nanoparticles and
their anti-bacterial activity. Der Pharma Chemica 4, 53-65.
[2] Gryczynski, I., Matveeva, E.G., Sarkar, P., Bahril, S.,
Borejdo, J., Mandecki, W., Akopowa, I., Gryczynski, Z.
(2008). Metal enhanced fluorescence on silicon wafer
substrates. Chem. Phys. Letters 462, 327.
[3] Larse, F.F., D’Agostin, F., Crosera, M., Adami, G., Renzi,
N., Bovenzi, M., Maina, G. (2009). Human skin penetration
of silver nanoparticles through intact and damaged skin.
Toxicology 255, 33-37.
[4] Franz, T.J. (1975). Percutaneous absorption. On the
relevance of in vitro data. J. Invest. Dermatol., 64, 190-195.

1

2

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 63, 80-308
Gdansk, Poland,
Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and
Informatics, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 57, 80-952 Gdansk,
Poland,

In recent years, many researchers focus their attention on
the synthesis and the application of nanoparticles of noble
metals [1]. Metal nanoparticles have outstanding
electrical, optical or magnetic properties compared to
their counterparts on a molecular scale [2]. Specially,
silver nanoparticles show interesting properties, therefore
they are widely used in medicine and pharmacy. In the
nanometer scale silver has a very good biocidal
properties.
Silver nanoparticles are widely used in cosmetics and
textiles, because of their antiseptic properties [3]. The
introduction of silver nanoparticles to cosmetic products
raises a lot of controversy and questions due to their
capability to penetrate or permeate the skin, which in turn
may lead to penetration into the bloodstream and their
accumulation in organs. Therefore, issues related to the
transport of silver nanoparticles through the skin is an
important part of the research of modern cosmetic
products. Nowadays, the penetration behaviour of an
active ingredient can be evaluated by in vitro, ex vivo,
and in vivo methods. Most of the data on percutaneous
penetration have been gained with in vitro or ex vivo
studies by experiments using a Franz diffusion chamber
[4].
In this work we show preparation of small silver
nanoparticles and the study of release from O/W and W/O
emulsions using Franz diffusion chamber. First time as a
membrane an "artificial skin" which consists of liposome
and cellulose acetate was used. Moreover, we investigated
the bactericidal properties of silver nanoparticles, which
can be used as a potential preservative in cosmetic
products.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been supported by the grant
2015/17/B/ST5/03143 financed by National Science
Centre (P. B., A. S., B. G.).

APPLICATION OF GIANT UNILAMELLAR
VESICLES IN STUDIES OF LOCALIZATION,
ORIENTATION AND MOLECULAR
ORGANIZATION OF BIOMOLECULES IN LIPID
MEMBRANES
W. Grudziński, J. Sagan, R. Welc, E. Reszczyńska,
R. Luchowski & W. I. Gruszecki
1

Department of Biophysics, Institute of Physics, Maria CurieSkłodowska University, Lublin, Poland

An idea of determination of orientation of molecules
bound to a single lipid bilayer membrane, based on a
confocal fluorescence microscopy, is presented along with
the examples of its realization. The system was tested
with application of well-known fluorescence marker Nile
blue. A single liposome was imaged with application of
two fluorescence detection channels, with separated
polarizations, parallel and perpendicular with respect to
the polarization of the excitation laser beam. A simple
analysis of images, in terms of a linear dichroism
formalism, enabled calculation of orientation of a
transition dipole of the chromophore with respect to the
axis normal to the plane of the membrane. Biomolecules
with polyene chromophores were incorporated to giant
unilamellar vesicles. Combined analysis of fluorescence
intensity, lifetimes and anisotropy enabled to gain insight
into molecular organization, orientation and localization
of amphotericin B and carotenoids in a single lipid
bilayer.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The presented results were financed by National
Science Center (UMO-2014/13/N/NZ1/00998).

38

Posters

CHILDREN WITH HCMF AUDITORY SYSTEM
EVALUATION – CASE STUDY
D. Hojan-Jezierska1,2, A. Majewska1, T. MatthewsBrzozowska3, L. Kubisz2,4, W. Kawałkiewicz4
1

Department of Hearing Healthcare Profession, Chair of Biophysics,
Poznan University of Medical Science, Poznań, Poland
2
Health Care Faculty, Stanislaw Staszic University of Applied Sciences
in Piła, Piła, Poland
3
Department of Maxillofacial Orthopaedics and Orthodontics, Poznan
University of Medical Science, Poznań, Poland
4
Department of Biophysics, Chair of Biophysics, Poznan University of
Medical Science, Poznań, Poland

Hemicraniofacial microsomia (HCMF) and Goldenhar
syndrome are prenatal branchial arch disorders affecting
aural, oral and mandibular development. HCMF is
phenotypically heterogenous and usually unilateral. It is
characterised by deformities of the outer, middle and even
inner ear, microtia or even anotia, preauricular skin tags
and preauricular pits, ocular malformations such as
epibulbar dermoids and lipodermoids, upper lid
coloboma, facial nerve palsy or paresis, mandible and
face development disorders.
High prevalence of hearing loss in patients with
Goldenhar syndrome and HCFM was documented. Either,
conductive, sensorineural or mixed hearing losses was
documented. Conductive component can be caused by
auricle deformities or absence, narrow, blocked or absent
ear canal or middle ear abnormalities. Sensorineural
component can be result of vestibule and cochlea
underdevelopment or malformations.
Detailed audiological evaluation of patients with
Goldenhar syndrome and HCFM, and in consequence
proper rehabilitation, selection and fitting of hearing aids
and consulting either patients hearing disorders or sensory
and motor development auditory training. Specific
diagnosis and early training determine normal
psychosocial development of children with HCMF.
The purpose of the present study was the assessment of
particular levels of the auditory pathway for both,
deformed and normally developed ear. Examinations such
as pure tone audiometry for both, air and bone
conduction, auditory brainstem responses (BERA) for
bone conducted stimuli were measured. Tympanometry,
DPOAE, TEOAE and SOAE for normally developed ear
was also carried out.

RADIOACTIVITY OF NATURAL MEDICINAL
PREPARATIONS WITH PEAT MUD AVAILABLE
IN RETAIL TRADE USED EXTERNALLY
M. Karpińska1, J. Kapała1, A. Bielawska1, G. Kulesza1,
M. Tylicka1, Z. Mnich2
Medical University of Białystok, Department of Biophysics
The State Higher School of Computer Science and Business
Administation in Lomża

1
2

Despite a great medical progress within the last decades,
the treatment of many disorders is completed with health

resort therapies. The latter include a variety of compresses
or substances added to baths. No reports on the attempt to
evaluate skin exposure to ionizing radioactivity related to
the use of such preparations has been found in literature.
There are suggestions, that small doses of radioactivity
change homeostasis within the skin. Also, according to
certain reports, equivalent doses of radon to the skin
during therapeutic cycle of thermal baths are within the
range of 0.12 – 0.33 mSv. At the market there are
preparations with peat mud, therapeutic peloid, which has
been used in the therapy of numerous disorders for ages.
The aim of the work is to identify and measure the
activity of radioactive isotopes present in preparations
with peat mud and to estimate the doses obtained during
the therapy.
The examination included 22 preparations with peat
mud. The activity measurement of the samples was
carried out with the method of gamma spectrometry using
spectrometric set by CANBERRA with 34.8% coaxial
germanium detector and computer system of collecting
and analyzing spectra, Genie 2000.
The total number of isotopes in particular preparations
was various. The median of the total activity was
24.8Bq/kg. Total maximal isotope activity of 146 Bq/kg
was observed in the Iwonicka Peat Mud Cube. Also,
considerable amounts of isotopes were observed in
Kołobrzeska Peat Mud Paste - 112 Bq/kg.
The effective dose obtained from different groups of
peat mud preparations was established. The agents for
rubbing the body or for the compresses contain large
amounts of peat mud – within the range of 80-90% of the
total mass. The effective dose for the whole body with the
use of those preparations from β emitters on the depth of
70 µm and gamma is about 5 µSv. This value is rather
small compared to the effective dose obtained by a
statistical Polish citizen from natural sources which
amounts to 2.43 mSv.

METHYL ESTER OF SINAPIC ACID AS THE
FLUORESCENT PROBE FOR PROTEIN AT
ALKALINE PH
A. Kasparek, B. Smyk, G. Mędza
Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Warmia and
Mazury in Olsztyn, Oczapowskiego 4, 10-719 Olsztyn, Poland

The main objective of this work was to investigate the
interaction between bovine serum albumin (BSA) and
methyl ester of sinapic acid (MESA) at alkaline pH 10.5 .
From our research, it is known that MESA form
complexes over range of pH 5-11. Evidences of the
formation of the protein-ligand molecular complexes are
new absorption bands in the range of 400-450 nm and
additional fluorescence bands with higher intensity and
quantum efficiency than ligands without presence of
protein.
Spectrophotometer Carry 5000 (Agilent) and fluorometer
Eclipse (Agilent) was used in the study. As the protein
bovine serum albumin was used and as the ligand methyl

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
ester of sinapic acid was used which was synthesized in
our lab.
Since increase and blue shift of fluorescence was
observed, MESA can be used in other research as the
fluorescent probe of hydrophobic sites in protein. Such
behavior was also observed in non-polar solvents.
By using Scatchard model, stoichiometry of the complex,
the number of binding sites and the association constant
of the protein-ligand complex at a pH 10.5 for the
different temperatures has been determined. Using these
data binding energy and change of entropy has been
calculated from Van't Hoff equation.

THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL
ESTIMATION OF DIPOLE MOMENTS OF
METHYL ESTER OF SINAPIC ACID
A. Kasparek, M. Pyrka, G. Mędza, B. Smyk
Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Warmia &
Mazury, Oczapowskiego 4, 10-719 Olsztyn, Poland

Sinapic acid is compound which is widespread in many
plants. Recently there were reports that methyl ester of
sinapic acid (MESA) can act as antioxidant. This phenolic
ester can act either in water or non-polar environment.
The aim of this work was to investigate physico-chemical
properties of MESA in many non-water environments polar and non-polar.
MESA was synthesized and its structure was checked
by 1H NMR technique. Fluorescence and absorption
spectra of MESA were measured in hexan, cyclohexane,
chloroform, ethanol, methanol, acetonitrile and dimethyl
sulfoxide. Based on the spectra’s, Stokes shift has been
calculated. These data has been used to calculate dipole
moments in excited states from Bilot-Kawski method.
To obtain dipole moments in ground states ab initio
calculation was done. All calculations were carried out by
Gaussian03 package with higher level DFT-BhandHLYP
(or Time Dependent-DFT for excited states) method and
aug-cc-pVDZ basis set. The structures were optimized in
the ground state and vibrational analysis were performed
to prove that stationary point were reached.
The optimized-ground-state geometries were used as
the initial one for electronic excitation computations.
Vertical excitation energies were calculated with respect
to the solvent response.
Dipole moments in excited states has been calculated both
from experimental data and from theoretical calculation.
Discrepancy between these results has been observed. These
difference can be explained as results of assumption in BilotKawski method that dipole moments in ground and excited
states are parallel to each other. Calculation without this
assumption has been made. Achieved results was much more
in line with theoretical results.

39

INTERACTION OF CYANIDIN AND ITS
GLYCOSIDES WITH LIPID MEMBRANE:
STRUCTURE-ACTIVITY RELATIONSHIP
H. Kleszczyńska1, S. Cyboran-Mikołajczyk1,
P. Jurkiewicz2 , K. Solarska-Ściuk1, R. Żyłka1, M. Hof2
1
Department of Physics and Biophysics, Wroclaw University of
Environmental and Life Sciences, Norwida 25, 50-375 Wrocław, Poland
2
J Heyrovsky Institute of Physical Chemistry, Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Dolejscova 2155/3, Prague 8, 182 23, Czech
Republic

Cyanidins are plant pigments widely distributed in fruits,
vegetables and grains, and therefore abundant in human
diet. They possess a wide range of biological activity, i.e.
antioxidant, anticancer and anti-inflammatory. However,
their interaction with the lipid membrane, responsible for
the proper functioning of the cells, is still unknown.
Therefore, the aim of this work is to determine the effect
of cyanidins on physical properties of the lipid membrane.
The impact of cyanidin and its 5 glycosides, containing
different number and type of sugars in their structure, on
the properties of hydrophobic part of the membrane was
determined by using steady state and time-resolved
fluorimetric methods. The effect of the compounds on the
properties of hydrophilic part of the membrane was
determined by using an infrared spectroscopy method.
Additionally, the abilities of the compounds to aggregate
lipid membranes and change the Zeta potential were
determined by using the dynamic and electrophoretic light
scattering methods.
The results indicate that cyanidin, as an aglycone,
causes great changes in both the hydrophobic and
hydrophilic part of the membrane. It decreases the
membrane fluidity, causing an increase in order of lipid
acyl chains and limiting their mobility. Cyanidin
glycosides at low concentration (25 µM) do not induce
changes in the hydrophobic part of the membrane, but at a
higher concentration of 100 µM they decrease membrane
fluidity. All the compounds also induce changes in the
region of the polar heads of lipids, altering their
orientation. The changes induced by glycosides depend on
the number and position of the sugar substituent as
fallows: cyanidin monosides are more active than biosides
and cyanidin monosaccharides are more active than
disaccharides. Additionally, the studies have shown that
cyanidin strongly aggregates liposomes regardless of their
net charge and decreases the membrane Zeta potential. In
the case of its glycosides neither aggregation of liposomes
nor change in Zeta potential were observed.
The changes induced by the compounds in the physical
properties of the lipid membrane indicate that cyanidin
glycosides are located mainly in the hydrophilic part of
the lipid membrane, whilst cyanidin can penetrate deeper
to the transition area of the membrane.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported from funds of the statutory
activity of the Department of Physics and Biophysics,

40

Posters

Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences.

EFFECT OF DNAZYME MODIFICATION ON
PEROXIDASE ACTIVITY

THE EFFECT OF VARIABLE MAGNETIC FIELD
ON THE GERMINATION AND EARLY GROWTH
OF WHEAT SEEDS (TRITICUM L.)

J. Kosman, B. Juskowiak

M. Konefał-Janocha1, S. Budzik1, A. Banaś2,
D. Bocak1, M. Bester1, M. Cholewa1
1

Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural
Sciences, University of Rzeszow, ul. Pigonia 1, 35-310
Rzeszow, Poland
2
Department of Immunology, Chair of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Rzeszow, ul. Kopisto 2a, 35-310 Rzeszow,
Poland

The magnetic fields have a great impact on processes
within plants. Nowadays, one of the priorities is the
search for ecological and economical ways to accelerate
plant growth, or improving yields. We decided to carry
out experiments involving wheat (Triticum L.) as it is
commonly used cereal plant (3rd place in the world in the
production of cereals). Wheat seeds were subjected to an
alternating magnetic field amplitude intensity of 3 mT,
frequency of 50 Hz and an exposure time which was
followed by 5, 10, 15 and 20 min and then sown and
cultured for 8 consecutive days. Every day counted the
number of new seeds germinated and the last day of the
experiment the plants were measured in terms of the
length of the root and shoot. On this basis, all samples
were characterized in terms of average root length,
average stem length, the average length of seedlings,
germination ability, Germination Rate Index (GRI) and
vigor index. For the shoot length we obtained 62-68%
increase, for root length – 35-44% increase, for seedling
length – 47-55% increase, for GRI – 12-20% increase, for
germination ability – 3-5% increase, for vigor index – 5260% increase in performance compared to the control
sample (not subjected to an electromagnetic field). The
results clearly show that even relatively low variable
solenoid field and used a short exposure time, has a
positive effect on germination and early growth of wheat
seedlings. For each test parameter was achieved better
results compared to the control sample, but it is difficult
to identify any particular relationship. Anyhow, this
correlation does not seem to be linear. The most
promising results were obtained on the exposure time of 5
and 20 minutes, but 10 and 15 minutes also performed
superior to than the control.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The study was performed within the project “Center for
Innovation and Transfer of Natural Sciences and
Engineering Knowledge” realized by University of
Rzeszow, cofinanced within Regional Operational
Programme for the Podkarpackie Province for the years
2007-2013, contract number UDA-RPPK.01.03.00-18001/10-00.

Laboratory of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Adam
Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland

Peroxidase-mimicking DNAzymes attracted a great
attention in bioanalysis thanks to many advantages over
protein enzymes like thermal stability, easy and low-cost
synthesis and purification [1,2]. Despite many
advantages, these systems possess some drawbacks
connected to hemin (DNAzyme cofactor) which is present
also in blind probe. Other disadvantage is low activity of
some G-quadruplex-forming sequences like telomeric
sequence (GGGTTA)n). To overcome these disadvantages
we decided to evaluate peroxidase activity of modified
DNAzymes.
Peroxidase-mimicking DNAzymes are formed by the
complex between hemin and G-quadruplex (G4). These
two components interacts with each other through endstacking mode. This type of interaction is possible since
G-quadruplex is formed by planar G-tetrads stacked on
each other.
In presented research we examined covalent attachment
of hemin molecule to DNA oligonucleotide as well as
employment of DNA analogue: 2’-OMe-RNA. The first
approach enable reduction of a background signal. The
second approach utilize DNA analogue which allows on
creation of more stable G-quadruplex structures.
Literature also indicate that 2’-OMe-RNA ribozymes
forms DNAzymes with higher activity [3]. The activity of
DNAzymes was monitored using two fluorogenic
substrates: Amplex Red and 4-(N-Methylhydrazino)-7nitro-2,1,3-benzooxadiazole (MNBDH).
Covalent attachment of hemin not only allowed on
reduction of blind probe signal but also resulted in
substantial higher activity of DNAzyme based on
telomeric sequence. Whereas application of 2’-OMe-RNA
resulted in increase of activity of all studied DNAzymes
with the highest increase for telomeric sequence.
The presented modifications allowed on increase and
control of catalytic activity of DNAzymes. On the one
hand they allow to increase the activity of systems even
those which when unmodified exhibits very low activity.
On the other hand application of DNA analogues is
beneficial from the point of further application in living
cells, where unprotected foreign DNA is destroyed by
deoxyribonuclease. Both modifications open the new
possibilities in development of DNA probes for
bioanalytical application.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Natioanla Science Center
grant no 2013/M/10/ST4/00490.

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
REFERENCES

41

two cultivars.

[1] Travascio P., Li Y., Sen D.(1998).
DNA-enhanced
peroxidase activity of a DNA aptamer-hemin complex.
Chem. Biol. 5, 505-517.
[2] Kosman J., Juskowiak B.(2011). Peroxidase-mimicking
DNAzymes for biosensing applications: a review. Anal.
Chim. Acta 707, 7-17.
[3] Li C., Zhu L., Zhu Z., Fu H., Jenkins G., Wang C., Zou Y.,
Lu X., Jang C.J.(2012) Backbone modification promotes
peroxidase activity of G-quadruplex-based DNAzyme.
Chem. Comm. 48, 8347-8349.

This study was supported by the National Science Centre.
Poland DEC-2015/17/B/NZ9/03589

STRUCTURE AND ROLE OF PECTINS (SODIUM
CARBONATE FRACTION) FOR CELL WALLS
MECHANICS

[1] Cybulska J., Zdunek A. & Kozioł A. (2015). The selfassembled network and physiological degradation of
pectins in carrot cell walls. Food Hydrocolloids 43,pp. 4150.
[2] Zdunek A., Kozioł A., Cybulska J., Lekka M. & Pieczywek
P.M. (2016). The stiffening of the cell walls observed
during physiological softening of pears. Planta 243(2),pp.
519-529.

A. Kozioł, J. Cybulska, P. M. Pieczywek, A. Zdunek
Department of Microstructure and Mechanics of Biomaterials, Institute
of Agrophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Doświadczalna 4, 20290 Lublin, Poland

Pectins are the most complex and diverse biopolymers in
plant cell walls. Recently, it was found that covalently
linked pectins in cell wall, that might be extracted with
sodium carbonate (DASP) from fresh fruits and
vegetables may form a regular network on freshly cleaved
mica [1]. The goal of this work was to evaluate the
structure and the role of the covalently linked pectin for
cell walls mechanics. Cell walls from pear (‘Xenia’ and
‘Conference’) were used. DASP pectins were extracted
after in vitro pectinase treatment of cell walls. The
mechanical properties of cell walls were evaluated with
atomic force microscope [2].
The height of the DASP molecules on mica was
between 0.2-1.8 nm. An average height was greater for
‘Xenia’ (0.82 nm) than for ‘Conference’ (0.66 nm). Too
dense structure did not allowed to evaluate the branching
index for ‘Xenia’, nevertheless for ‘Conference’ this
parameter was 8.2 per 1 micrometer. AFM images
revealed a clear change of the DASP structure after
treatment with pectinase. In both cultivars, pectinases
caused loosening of the regular structure that was
characteristic for the control sample. Thickness of the
DASP molecules decreased as well. The average height
decreased to 0.25 nm (‘Conference’) and to 0.41 nm
(‘Xenia’). Moreover for ‘Conference’ the branching index
decreased to 7.8. Further increase of the pectinase activity
caused total depolimerization of the regular structure to a
spot-like and oval shape structure.
The Young’s modulus of cell walls before pectin
extraction was 2.5 and 3.8 MPa for ‘Conference’ and
‘Xenia’ respectively. After extraction of the DASP, cell
walls of both cultivars reached very similar stiffness of
about 0.8-1 MPa. ‘Xenia’ had thicker, more dense,
branched and less susceptible for pectinase pectin
molecules that corresponds to stiffer cell walls and harder
texture of fruit as well. These results suggests that
particularly the sodium carbonate fraction is responsible
for the difference in mechanical properties between these

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

THE EFFECT OF NANOPARTICLES C60(OH)X,
X>30 ON HUMAN BLOOD CELLS
A. Krokosz1, A. Lichota1, J. Grebowski2
1
Division of Radiobiology, Department of Molecular Biophysics,
Faculty of Biology and Environmental Protection, University of Lodz,
141/141 Pomorska Str., 90-236 Lodz
2
Division of Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Warsaw,
Pasteura 1, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland

Due to their properties, fullerenols can be used in
radiobiology, chemotherapy, or in the treatment
of neurodegenerative diseases. There are many reports
that fullerenol protects cells against oxidative stress
generated by ionizing radiation and/or anticancer drugs.
The fullerenol molecule can be also excited with visible
or ultraviolet light creating a reactive molecule that easily
interacts with oxygen or biomolecules and has
applications
in
photosensitization
(Grebowski,
Kazmierska & Krokosz, 2013).
We demonstrated that highly hydroxylated fullerenol
C60(OH)x, x>30 (up to 150 mg/L) is non-toxic to human
erythrocytes, however, can adsorb to plasma membrane
proteins, especially to ion-dependent ATPases decreasing
their activity and to band 3 protein (Krokosz &
Grebowski, 2016).
Fullerenol protected lymphocytes against X-ray induced
loss of cell viability after 48-hour post-radiation
incubation, however, it enhanced human peripheral blood
lymphocytes granularity after 24-hour incubation without
causing cytotoxicity (Nowak, Krokosz, Rodacka &
Puchala, 2014).
In this work the influence of fullerenol C60(OH)x, x>30
up to 150 mg/L on erythrocyte membrane parameters
under ionizing-radiation generated oxidative stress as well
as the effects of fullerenol on peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) were assessed. Fullerenol
added 1 hour before irradiation protected erythrocyte
membrane –SH groups against radiation oxidation and
preserved the conformation of membrane proteins as
determined by spin labeling method, however, the effect

42

Posters

was post-radiation time dependent.
In case of PBMC, the cytofluorometric measurements
indicated that the fullerenol had a little effect on the
mitochondrial potential. Moreover, at a concentration of
150 mg/mL a few necrotic cells were visible assessed by
propidium iodide (PI) and calcein-AM double staining.
Our studies confirm a little toxicity of fullerenol against
blood cells and its antioxidative properties.

REFERENCES
[1] Grebowski J., Kazmierska P. & Krokosz A. (2013).
Fullerenols as a New Therapeutic Approach in
Nanomedicine.
BioMed
Res.
Internat.,
2013,
751913(9 pages).
[2] Krokosz A. & Grebowski J. (2016). Activity of membrane
ATPases in human erythrocytes under the influence of
highly hydroxylated fullerenol. [In:] Chakraborti S., Dhalla
N.S. (eds.) Regulation of Membrane Na+-K+ ATPase,
Springer International Publishing Switzerland,
pp.
159-172.
[3] Nowak K., Krokosz A., Rodacka A. & Puchala M. (2014).
Study on the effect of polyhydroxylated fullerene,
C60(OH)36, on X-ray irradiated human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells. Radiat. Phys. Chem., 97, 325–331.

ACTIVITY OF HUMAN CYTOSOLIC
NUCLEOTIDASE, cN-IIIB TOWARDS
NUCLEOSIDE MONOPHOSPAHTES
D. Kubacka1, J. Jemielity2, J. Kowalska1
1

Division of Biophysics, Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of
Physics, University of Warsaw, Poland
2
Centre of New Technologies, University of Warsaw, Poland

Human cytosolic 5’ nucleotidase, cN-IIIB, belongs to the
family of eight enzymes catalyzing the hydrolytic
defosforylation of nucleoside monophosphates to
nucleosides and orthophosphate. As a one of catabolitic
enzymes, it contributes to the regulation of nucleotide
levels in living cells, however, its exact role in the cell has
not been established so far. Due to the distinctive activity
towards m7GMP, it has been assumed that cN-IIIB
participates in mRNA decay, and protects cells against
undesired salvage of m7GMP and its incorporation into
nucleic acids. In our study, we used a library of fifty
nucleoside monophosphates to investigate the substrate
specificity and inhibition of cN-IIIB enzyme by means of
HPLC. This will allow to understand the basis of cN-IIIB
selectivity for substrates as well as to design unnatural
inhibitors of the protein. The selected compounds could
be used in the future as molecular probes to monitor the
enzyme activity in cells.

APPLICATION OF SOME SPECTROSCOPIC
METHODS TO PHOTOPHYSICAL PROPERTIES
INVESTIGATIONS OF BIOMEDICAL OBJECTS
A. A. Kubicki*, M. Mońka
Institute of Experimental Physics, Department of Mathematics, Physics
and Informatics, University of Gdańsk, Poland
*e-mail: A.Kubicki@ug.edu.pl

One of the most interesting and controversial group of the
molecules of the last decades are hydroxy derivatives of
stilbene. Their chemotherapeutic and chemopreventive
properties have been a subject of increasing interest lately.
Their photophysical properties are widely described in
many theoretical and experimental reports. Huge increase
of the number of reports on the existence of the stilbenelike molecules in plants, fruits, food products and
beverages is the proof on very high interest of
biophysicist, physicist, chemist and biomedical scientists.
Because of the chemical structure of these molecules,
they are very attractive objects for investigation of
photoisomerization, intramolecular charge transfer,
ultrafast radiationless and solvent relaxation, as well.
Among the experimental methods to investigate such
processes are emission anisotropy spectra and timeresolved emission spectra measurements. Both methods
are complementary and allow to study behavior of the
molecules in different environment (liquids, solid state,
thin layer) and conditions with picosecond time resolution
and subnanometers resolution in the wavelength scale.
Revitalized setup of the system for emission anisotropy
spectra measurements (methodology – [1]) with
credibility tests are described. Comparison to previous
results [2] are made and some new results are presented.
Time-resolved emission spectra [3] for the same samples
are also presented, with the interpretation of deactivation
pathways presented for samples in various conditions.
Ultrafast deactivation obviously seen in the blue region of
emission spectra can be interpreted as simultaneous
intramolecular charge transfer and solvent relaxation, as
well.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work has been sponsored by the University of
Gdańsk grant 530-5200-D464-15.

REFERENCES
[1] Kubicki A. (1989), A Universal Photon-Counting
Measuring System for Polarized Spectroscopy, Exp. Tech.
Physik, 37, 329.
[2] Borowiak M., Grobelna B., Synak A., Bojarski P.,Kubicki
A. A. (2013) Time-resolved emission spectra of 4dimethylamino-4’-cyano-stilbene and resveratrol in high
viscosity solvents and silica matrices,Spectrochimica Acta
Part A: Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy, 115,
111.
[3] Kubicki A. A., Bojarski P., Grinberg M., Sadownik M.,
Kukliński B. (2006), Time resolved streak camera system

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
with solid state laser and optical parametric generator in
different spectroscopic applications Opt. Comm., 263, 275.

THE EFFECT OF BISPHENOL A AND ITS
SELECTED ANALOGS ON CELL MEMBRANE
FLUIDITY OF HUMAN ERYTHROCYTES
A. Maćczak, M. Koter-Michalak, P. Duchnowicz,
B. Bukowska, J. Michałowicz
Department of Environmental Pollution Biophysics, Faculty of Biology,
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland

Bisphenols are chemical substances used in massive
amounts in the production of epoxy resins, polycarbonates
and thermal paper. Bisphenol A (BPA) is the most
representative bisphenol with an annual production of
above 6 million tons. Moreover, a significant increase in
the production of BPA analogs such as bisphenol F (BPF),
bisphenol S (BPS) and bisphenol AF (BPAF) has been
noted, which is mainly associated with a ban on BPA in
some countries (including the European Union, since
2011) in various products including products for infants,
packaging and bottles.
The widespread of BPA and its analogs in the
environment and human surrounding (food, drinking
water, dust) leads to significant exposure of human to
these substances. The occurrence of BPA and its analogs
in human organism has been documented in numerous
research works.
BPA is the best-studied compound among bisphenols. It
exhibits estrogenic activity, and is potentially
carcinogenic for humans. The results of toxicological
studies have indicated that other bisphenols may also
exhibit a similar or even stronger toxicity than BPA, but
the number of research works in this area is too small to
provide correct conclusions at this moment.
Red blood cells are the most plentiful cells of the
circulatory system. The erythrocytes are directly exposed
to xenobiotics like bisphenols that enter to the body
because these cells participate in transport of various
chemicals. As enucleated cells, they are suitable model to
assess the effect of xenobiotics on changes in cell
membrane properties. Up to now, no work has been
undertaken in order to analyze the effect of bisphenols on
erythrocyte membrane, thus, in this study the effect of
BPA and its analogs on changes in red blood cells
membrane fluidity was studied.
The erythrocytes were incubated with BPA or its analog
in the concentrations ranging from 0.5 to
250 µg/mL for 4 or 24 h. After incubation, the excess of
the compounds was discarded, the erythrocytes were
labeled with 5-doxylstearic acid (5-DSA) or 16doxylstearic acid (16-DSA), and then changes in cell
membrane fluidity were analyzed by electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy.
For the erythrocytes labeled with 5-DSA, order
parameter S was determined for which no changes for any
bisphenol were noted. The compounds examined
disturbed hydrophobic regions of erythrocytes membrane

43

labeled with 16-DSA (for this analysis, relaxation times of
tau B and tau C were determined). The strongest changes
were noticed in red blood cells incubated with BPA, BPF
and BPAF that altered erythrocyte membrane fluidity
from the concentrations of 5 μg/mL and 0.5 μg/mL,
respectively after 24 h of incubation. The most probably,
BPA and its analogs due to their significant lipophilicity
were located in hydrophobic layer of the erythrocyte
membrane. Changes in the parameter studied were noted
for bisphenols in the concentrations that may influence
human body as a result of occupational exposure (BPA,
BPAF) or subacute poisoning (BPF, BPS) with these
substances.

VESTIBULAR EVOKED MYOGENIC
POTENTIALS (VEMP), MEASURED FOR 0,5, 1,
2KHZ TONE BURST AND CLICKSTIMULI,
CHARACTERISTICS ANALYSIS
A. Majewska1, D. Hojan-Jezierska1,3, L. Kubisz2,3,
W. Kawałkiewicz2, W. Loba1, M. Balcerowska1
1

Department of Hearing Healthcare Profession, Chair of Biophysics,
Poznan University of Medical Science, 6 Grunwaldzka St., 61-780
Poznań, Poland
2
Department of Biophysics, Chair of Biophysics, Poznan University of
Medical Science, 6 Grunwaldzka St., 61-780 Poznań,
3
Health Care Faculty, Stanislaw Staszic University of Applied Sciences
in Piła, 10 Podchorążych St., 64-920 Piła, Poland

Balance control system includes integrated vestibular,
visual and somatosensory inputs. Vestibular sensory
system contains five receptors: two macular (saccule and
utricule) and three canalar (lateral, posterior and
superior). This mechanism is responsible for upright
posture control and vision stabilization. The vestibular
evoked myogenic potentials test (VEMP) is more and
more popular examination, which gives us information
about the otolith function – saccule and utricule, inferior
vestibular nerve, and central connections. VEMP
examination is very useful in superior semicircular canal
dehiscence, Ménière disease, vestibular neuritis,
otosclerosisor and Multiple Sclerosis diagnosis. Myogenic
potentials evoked by high intensity tone burst stimulus
can be recorded from contracted sternocleidomastoid
(cVEMP) or from extraocular muscles (oVEMP).
Parameters like presence or absence of VEMP response
(P1 and N1 waves), P1-N1 amplitude ratio, threshold,
tuning curves across frequencies and difference between
amplitudes for both ears are analyzed. Consistent muscle
contraction during examination is very important.
Departments and research facilities are encouraged to
develop their own normative data depending on
equipment settings.
The aim of this study was to compare the vestibular evoked
myogenic responses registered for 500, 1000 and 2000 tone
burst and click stimuli. VEMP examination was assessed
using ICS Chartr EP 2000 system and insert headphones.
Measurement was carried out in Faraday cage to eliminate
disturbances related to external electromagnetic field.

44

Posters

DYNAMIC POSTUROGRAPHY IN STUDIES ON
ACOUSTIC DISTURBANCES OF POSTURAL
STABILITY
A. Majewska1, W. Kawałkiewicz1, D. HojanJezierska1,2, A. Jezierska1, L. Kubisz1,2
1

Department of Hearing Healthcare Profession, Chair of Biophysics,
Poznan University of Medical Science, Poznań, Poland
2
Department of Biophysics, Chair of Biophysics, Poznan University of
Medical Science, Poznań, Poland
3
Health Care Faculty, Stanislaw Staszic University of Applied Sciences
in Piła, Piła, Poland

One of the clinical tests evaluating the motor skills is
posturography. Posturography examinations divided into
static posturography and dynamic posturography. During
static posturography patient stays on the stable platform
while during dynamic one platform is unstable. In both,
static posturography and dynamic posturography, patients
are examined either with eyes opened or eyes closed. The
methods permits the evaluation of the balance control
system including vestibular, visual and somatosensory
mechanisms. The high intensity acoustic stimuli can
induce the vestibular signs and symptoms as vertigo,
nystagmus, oscillopsia and electromyographic potentials,
what have been studied and discussed in literature [1-2].
The aim of this study was to determine the 4kHz and
65dB stimulus effect on postural stability of healthy
subjects. Up to now, the influence of normal
conversational pressure level sound was not described in
the available literature. The most sensitive to acoustic
stimuli posturography parameter was also searched.
Measurements were carried out using Multitest
Equilibre platform produced by FRAMIRAL. The
platform allows to carried both, static posturography and
dynamic posturography. Such parameters as velocity and
surface were recorded. During researches patients firstly
made test without acoustic stimulus.Next, procedure was
repeated with 4 kHz, 65 dB acoustic stimulus. Data were
collected from 30 subjects, aged 20 to 35 years (10 males
and 20 females) and none of them had hearing loss.
Hearing threshold for each patient was measured with
pure tone audiometry before posturography examination.
The exclusion criteria were: medications taken in regular
basis and history of vertigo or balance disorders.
The statistically significant difference between some
parameters measured in the presence of 4000 Hz, 65 dB
acoustic stimulus and without additional disturbances was
observed. The research was approved by the Bioethical
Committee Research.

REFERENCES
[1] Selmani, Z., Ishizaki, H., &Pyykkö, I. (2004). Can low
frequency sound stimulation during posturography help
diagnosing possible perilymphatic fistula in patients with
sensorineural hearing loss and/or vertigo?. European
Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Head & Neck,
261(3), 129-132
[2] Alessandrini, M., Lanciani, R., Bruno, E., Napolitano, B.,
& Di Girolamo, S. (2006). Posturography frequency

analysis of sound-evoked body sway in normal subjects.
European Archives of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Head &
Neck, 263(3), 248-252

BIOPHYSICS OF BRAIN: PERSPECTIVES OF
BRAIN-COMPUTER INTERFACE IN
BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
D. Man
Department of Medical Physics, Institute of Physics, Opole University,
Opole, Poland

The beginning of the XXI century in science and
technology has resulted in tremendous development of
diagnostic and therapeutic methods, based on digital
techniques using feedback from the brain-computer.
Studies provided by neurophysiologists, which indicated
the presence of typical potential activities of the brain,
enabled the construction of BCI interfaces (Brain
Computer Interface). This technology [1,2], by analyzing
of EEG signals, makes it possible to control correctly
prepared applications running on PCs, smartphones and
tablets. In practice, it enables the control of consumer and
professional electronic devices by people with the most
serious neurological deficits. Therefore, the potential of
BCI technology for use in biocybernetics and biomedical
engineering is not to be underestimated. The development
of BCI technology clearly divides into two fundamental
groups . The first one leads to the use of feedback
between the patient (subject) and the appropriate PC
application and is used mainly for neuropsychological
and psychiatric therapies and meditation or mental
techniques. The second group is the use of BCI interface
to control machines. It covers a broad application in
biomedical engineering (neuroproteasis, exoskeletons,
bionic support systems) and special support of patients
with serious neurological deficits (eg. severe paralysis).
Both groups fundamentally alter the position of the
patient, open up new possibilities, which until recently
were described as Science Fiction. EEG devices available
on the market can be divided into two groups of BCI.
The first one is a set of "headphones" of EEG which can
cooperate with ready-made software packages for the PC
and mobile devices. Their main addressee are people
using EEG biofeedback techniques. These systems are
characterized by simple, one or several electrode headsets
put on the forehead, with the reference electrode in the
form of a clip which placed on the earlobe (ie. kits of
NeuroSky and Emotiv Insight classic). The second group
involves much more advanced kits which can fully map
functions of brain currents. They consist of a helmet
containing a dozen or several dozen salt electrodes,
coupled with the BCI interface. With software such sets
(eg. Emotiv EPOC and the EPOC +) it impossible to do
scientific work, design-built biomedical and cyber devices
for industrial and medical applications.

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
REFERENCES
[1] Nicolas-Alonso L.F. & Gomez-Gil J. (2012). Brain
computer interfaces, a review. Sensors (Basel), 12(2), 12111279.
[2] Shih J.J., Krusienski D.J., Wolpaw J.,R. (2012). Braincomputer interfaces in medicine. Mayo Clinic Proceedings.
87(3), 268-279.

ENCAPSULATED DOXORUBICIN ARMED WITH
gH625 PEPTIDE DOES NOT DAMAGE NORMAL
ENDOTHELIAL CELLS AS FREE DOXORUBICIN
K. Matczak1, K. Durka1, S. Galdiero2,
A. Koceva-Chyła1
1

Department of Medical Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and
Environmental Protection, University of Łódź, Pomorska 141/143, PL90236 Łódź, Poland
2
Department of Pharmacy, University of Naples Federico II, Via
Domenico Montesano 49, 80131 Napoli, Italy

Doxorubicin (DOX) is one of the oldest and most widely
used anthracyclines employed in the chemotherapy of a
broad spectrum of solid tumors and hematopoietic and
lymphoid malignancies. Chemotherapy based on DOX
although very effective causes a number of adverse
effects. The most dangerous among them is
cardiomyopathy, leading to congestive heart failure. One
of the approaches aimed at reducing DOX side effects is
the development of liposomal formulations of DOX,
which limit the drug cardiotoxicity and facilitate its
release in the close vicinity of the tumor. This strategy
works well in clinical practice. The problem remains,
however, with the transport of this form of drug through
the blood-brain barrier (BBB).
Cationic cell-penetrating peptides are a group of short
peptides able to cross the lipid bilayer using
a mechanism mediated by endocytosis. This kind of
molecules are well suited for development as drug
delivery vehicles. Peptide gH625, derived from
glycoprotein H of herpes simplex virus type 1, can enter
cells efficiently. Nanoparticles armed with gH625 are able
to cross the BBB in in vitro model.
In the study the toxicity of
free DOX, DOX
encapsulated in liposomal carrier and DOX encapsulated in
liposomal carrier armed with gH625 peptide towards
normal HMEC-1 cells derived from dermal microvascular
endothelium was evaluated on the basis of their ability to
induce the collapse of mitochondrial transmembrane
potential (ΔΨm) as an early indicator of apoptosis. The
cells were treated with five different concentrations of
DOX – IC10 (0.35 nM), 0.5 IC50 (0.30 nM), IC50 (0.61
nM), 2IC50 (1.22 nM) and IC90 (1.04 nM) for 3h. Then
the drug was removed and changes in ΔΨm were assessed
with the fluorescent probe JC-1 (5,5’,6,6’-tetrachloro1,1’,3,3’-tetraethyl-benzimidazolo-carbo cyanine iodide).
Fluorescence of JC-1 monomers and dimmers was
measured over 0-60 min period after the treatment in
order to estimate the kinetics of ΔΨ m changes caused by
the investigated compounds.

45

Free DOX causes depolarization of mitochondrial
membrane, regardless of the drug concentration. After 60
min of the treatment the treated cells recovered their ΔΨm,
which returned to the level characteristic of untreated
cells. Encapsulated DOX did not affect the mitochondrial
membrane potential. The encapsulated DOX armed with
gH625 peptide cause transient mitochondrial membrane
hyperpolarization, and this effect became more
pronounced with an increasing drug concentration.
These results suggest that liposomal encapsulation of
DOX can protect normal endothelial cells against
mitochondrial damage and collapse of ΔΨm induced by
free DOX.
FIVE – MEMBERED NITROXYL DERIVATIVES
ENHANCE PACLITAXEL ANTICANCER
ACTIVITY IN HUMAN BREAST CANCER CELLS
K. Matczak, A. Koceva-Chyła
Department of Medical Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and
Environmental Protection, University of Łódź, Pomorska 141/143, PL90236 Łódź, Poland

Aim of study. Nitroxides Pirolin (2,2,5,5-tetra-methyl-3carbamoyl pyrroline-1-oxyl, PL) and Pirolid (2,2,5,5tetramethyl-3-carbamoylpyrrolidine-1-oxyl, PD) are fivemembered, cell-permeable stable radical antioxidants with
a broad spectrum of activity. In light of our previous SAR
studies on six-membered nitroxides, acting as less toxic
anticancer agents and antioxidants, we aimed at
investigating the effect of five-membered PL and PD on the
anticancer activity of paclitaxel (PTX) toward human
breast cancer cells (MCF-7 cell line) with an emphasis on
DNA damage and microtubule disruption induced by this
drug. The exact mechanism of PTX cytotoxicity against
tumor cells is still under extensive study. It is commonly
accepted that the drug interacts with microtubules and
induces apoptosis in various tumor cells.
Material and Methods. MCF-7 breast cancer cells were
incubated with the IC50 concentration of paclitaxel (0.4
μmol/l) for 2 h and with 50 μmol/l concentration of
nitroxides for 3 h. When combination of both compounds
was used the cells were pretreated with Pirolin or Pirolid
for 1 h before the addition of PTX. After the treatment
investigated compounds were removed and the cells were
immediately subjected to further analysis or after 24-72 h
culture in drug-free medium. DNA damage was analyzed
using single cell electrophoresis (comet assay). Inhibition
of microtubule depolymerization was investigated using
an immunohistochemistry method with monoclonal
antibody against β-tubulin.
Results. Paclitaxel caused both DNA damage and
microtubule disruption. Preincubation with nitroxyl
derivatives enhanced antitumor effect of PTX –
accelerated appearance of DNA damage and increased
their level. The nitroxides did not interfere with the main
cellular mechanism of PTX anticancer activity –
stabilization of the microtubule polymerization and their
protection from disassembly.

46

Posters

Conclusions. Five-membered nitroxyl derivatives
Pirolin and Pirolid seem to be promising compounds with
antitumor properties, which do not exhibit cytotoxic
properties by themselves, but enhance the anticancer
activity of paclitaxel toward human breast cancer cells.

INTERCONNECTION BETWEEN APOPTOSIS
AND AUTOPHAGY IN HUMAN BREAST CANCER
CELLS TREATED WITH PIROLIN AND
DOXORUBICIN

induction of autophagy by DOX but did not affect
apoptosis induced of by this drug in human breast cancer
cells.

SPECTROSCOPIC STUDIES OF THE SOLVENT
EFFECTS OF SELECTED COUMARIN
DERIVATIVES AND THEIR COMPLEXES WITH dBLOCK METAL IONS
A. Matwijczuk1, D. Karcz2, J. Waś3, A. Matwijczuk1,
A. Sujak1, M. Gagoś4, B. Creaven5, M. Walsh5

K. Matczak, A. Koceva-Chyła
1

Department of Medical Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and
Environmental Protection, University of Łódź, Pomorska 141/143, PL90236 Łódź, Poland

Introduction. Interconnection between apoptosis and
autophagy and their significance in the cancer cell death
are still under extensive investigation. Autophagy (or
autophagocytosis) is an evolutionarily conserved
catabolic process that occurs in the cells under stress
conditions and allows the orderly degradation and
recycling of cellular components Basically, during
autophagy cell components are closed within a doublemembraned vesicle (autophagosome), which content after
fusion
with
a lysosome is subjected to complete degradation and then
recycled. One of the cellular components degraded by
autophagy are mitochondria, damaged by induction of
apoptosis. Such mitochondria release cytochrome c,
which is involved in the propagation of apoptotic cell
death.
Aim of study. The aim of the study was to investigate
the ability of nitroxyl derivative Pirolin (nontoxic, cellpermeable, low molecular weight and stable free radical)
and anticancer drug doxorubicin (DOX) to induce
autophagy and cytochrome c release in human breast
cancer cells. The nitroxide and anticancer drug were used
alone and in combination.
Methods. MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells
were incubated with IC50 concentration of DOX
(6 μmol/l) for 2 h and with 50 μmol/l concentration of
nitroxide for 3 h. When combination of both compounds
was used the cells were pretreated with Pirolin for 1 h
before the addition of DOX. The cells were subjected to
analysis immediately after the treatment with investigated
compounds or after 24-72 h culture in drug-free medium.
Induction of autophagy was analyzed on the basis of
autophagosome formation assessed by fluorescence
microscopic examination of cells stained with acridine
orange. Cytochrome c release was analyzed by ELISA
method.
Results. Pirolin by itself did not induce formation of
autophagosomes in cancer cells, but accelerated the
induction of this process in cells treated with DOX.
Nitroxide did not cause the efflux of cytochrome c from
mitochondria and did not affect significantly the efflux of
cytochrome c in cells treated with DOX.
Conclusions. Proline accelerates and enhanced the

Department of Biophysics, University of Life Sciences, ul. Akademicka
13, Lublin, Poland
2
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Institute C-1, Faculty of Chemical
Engineering and Technology, ul. Warszawska 24,
Krakow, Poland
3
Department of Chemistry, Jagiellonian University, ul. Ingardena 3,
Krakow, Poland
4
Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Biology and Biochemistry,
Maria Curie-Skłodowska University, 20-033, Lublin, Poland
5
Centre for Applied Science and Health, Institute of Technology
Tallaght, Dublin 24, Ireland

Different types of coumarin derivatives are well-known
compounds with antitumour, antibacterial, or antifungal
activity. Both natural and synthetic derivatives of these
compounds have been successfully used in in food and
cosmetic industry for years. Also, selected coumarin
derivatives are used as laser dyes or highly sensitive
molecular probes.
A large number of publications have evidenced that the
biological activity of these organic compounds is
considerably enhanced in their complexes with metal
ions. Investigations of complexes of some derivatives of
the analysed compounds showed their high antifungal
activity. Some complexes of these compounds (e.g. Schiff
bases) with Cu(II) exhibit excellent activity against
Candida. Furthermore, some Cu(II) complexes showed
substantially greater activity than that of free ligands, and
their IC50 values were comparable to those of
commercial Amphothericin B and Ketoconazole.
Despite their high activity in vitro, the low solubility of
the analysed compounds and their complexes with metal
ions in water or other organic solvents is often a serious
drawback limiting considerably their commercial use. It is
therefore important to understand the mechanisms of
action of these compounds at the molecular level in order
to develop a novel series with enhanced solubility and,
hence, potential applicability. In an attempt to develop a
new compound series, complexes of the aforementioned
ligands with Cu(II) and Pd(II), which is well known for
its catalytic properties, were prepared. The free ligand
(L1),
which
was
derived
from
2,3,4trihydroxybenzaldehyde and 7-amino-4-methylcoumarin
together with its corresponding Pd(II) and Cu(II) complex
(L1-Pd, L1-Cu), served as a model compound in this
study.
The structures and purity of the L1, L1-Pd, and L1-Cu were
confirmed using 1H-NMR, FTIR, and AAS spectroscopic
methods and elemental analysis. The photophysical properties
of all compounds were investigated using UV-vis,

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
fluorescence (steady state), and Time Resolved Fluorescence
(TRF) spectroscopy. Spectroscopic analyses were performed
in selected organic solvents.

47

of Environmental and Life Sciences in Wrocław.

REFERENCES

HORSETAIL (EQUISETUM ARVENSE)
EXTRACT’S PHYTOCHEMICALS IN
INTERACTION WITH THE BIOLOGICAL
MEMBRANE
K. Męczarska1, D. Bonarska-Kujawa1, J. Oszmiański2,
R. Żyłka1, H. Kleszczyńska1
Department of Physics and Biophysics, Wrocław University of
Environmental and Life Sciences, Norwida 25, 50-375 Wrocław, Poland
2
Department of Fruit, Vegetable and Cereal Technology, Wrocław
University of Environmental and Life Sciences, Norwida 25, 50-375,
Wrocław, Poland
1

The risk of civilizational diseases induced search for new
substances, both those of protective action that could
diminish the risk, and those that help healing the diseases.
Numerous studies have shown that natural, plant-derived
compounds are characterized by good bioavailability and
have no side effects. One of such substances is Equisetum
arvense (common horsetail) extract, which due to its high
content of polyphenolic substances exhibits strong antiinflammatory, antibacterial, hepatoprotective, diuretic and
antioxidant activity [1]. Its health promoting properties
encouraged the authors to undertake biophysical studies
on the effect of the extract at the molecular and cell level.
The study aimed to determine the polyphenolic content
of the extract, its antioxidant activity, and examine its
effect on hemolysis and osmotic resistance of the red
blood cell. The purpose of the experiments was to
investigate the mechanism of the interaction of horsetail
extracts with erythrocyte and DMPC lipid membrane. The
content of polyphenolic compounds in the extract was
determined by using the chromatographic HPLC-DAD
and total phenolic content method. Antioxidant activity
was examined with regard to erythrocyte membranes,
using spectrophotometric methods, with UVC radiation as
the oxidizing agent. With a spectrophotometric method
we also determined the hemolytic activity of the extract
polyphenols and their effect on osmotic resistance of
erythrocytes. Spectrofluorimetrically, changes in packing
order and fluidity of the erythrocyte membrane was
determined. Using FTIR spectroscopy, changes in the
hydration of the lipid membrane was examined. The
horsetail extracts showed antioxidant activity in relation
to the erythrocyte membrane. The findings indicate that
the polyphenolic compounds contained in horsetail
extract, due to their composition, do not destroy the
biological membrane. Phytochemicals of the extract when
interacting with the surface polar part of the erythrocyte
membrane protect it from oxidation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Work financed from funds of the statutory activity of the
Department of Physics and Biophysics of the University

[1] Gründemann C., Lengen K., Sauer B., Garcia-Käufer M.,
Zehl M., & Huber M. (2014). Equisetum arvense (common
horsetail) modulates the function of inflammatory
immunocompetent cells. BMC Complementary and
Alternative Medicine, 14:283

VOLUME, PRESSURE AND VISCOSITY
MEASUREMENTS AS A USEFUL TOOL FOR
EXPLANATION OF BAKING EXPANSION
PROCESS
A. Miś, A. Nawrocka, M. Gancarz, R. Rusinek,
Z. Niewiadomski
Department of Physical Properties of Plant Materials, Institute of
Agrophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Doswiadczalna 4,
20-290 Lublin, Poland.

Changes in volume, pressure, and viscosity of wheat
dough leavened by baking powder during model baking
were analysed. The volume changes showed two baking
stages, i.e. dough expansion and crumb shrinking.
Through the analysis of pressure and viscosity extremes,
the baking expansion stage was divided into five phases.
The relaxation phase (R) is the first baking phase during
which a decline in pressure and viscosity of dough are
observed concurrently. The low pressure of leavening
gases relative to the high dough viscosity results in low
dough expansion (~2%).
In the softening phase (S), there is a substantial decline
in viscosity accompanied by a gradual pressure rise. The
overlapping of these two opposite transformations leads
to a dynamic increase in the dough expansion (~54%).
The gelatinisation phase (G) is characterised by a
significant increase in dough viscosity resulting from the
starch gelatinisation and protein aggregation process. It
results in a gradual slowing-down of the expansion rate,
however, the contribution of this phase to the dough
expansion is still significant (~22%).
The opening phase (O) begins at the time of a rapid
pressure decrease as a result of forming openings in the
bubble walls. However, despite its substantial decrease,
the gas pressure is still sufficiently high to overcome the
crumb shrinking force and maintain further expansion
(~18%).
The boiling phase (B) initiates when the temperature in
the peripheral loaf zone reaches the water boiling point.
Released water vapour gradually raises dough pressure,
which prevents collapse of the crumb and results in a
slight volume increase (~4%). Losses in the water content
are one of the basic transformations leading to final
thermosetting of the crumb cellular structure and to
completion of the baking expansion.

48

Posters
5’CAP-BINDING SITE MUTATIONS IN EIF4E
ABOLISH POSITIVE EFFECT OF THE CAP
ON THE EIF4E – 4E-BP1 INTERACTION

A. Modrak-Wojcik1, J. Zuberek1, A. Stelmachowska1,
K. Zdanowski2,3 and R. Stolarski1
1

Division of Biophysics, Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of
Physics, University of Warsaw, 93 Zwirki & Wigury St.,
02-089 Warsaw, Poland,
2
Institute of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
5A Pawinskiego St., 02-106 Warsaw, Poland
3
Institute of Chemistry, University of Natural Sciences and Humanities,
3 Maja 54 St., 08-110 Siedlce, Poland

Specific recognition of the mRNAs 5’ terminal cap
structure by the eukaryotic initiation factor eIF4E is the
first, rate-limiting, step in the cap-dependent translation.
Small
4E-binding
proteins,
4E-BP1,
4E-BP2, and 4E-BP3, inhibit the translation initiation by
competing with eIF4G initiation factor for the same
binding site and by blocking the assembly
of the translation machinery [1].
The affinity of the 4E-BP1 inhibitory protein for wild
type (WT) eIF4E increases about 10-fold in the presence
of m7GTP, Kas ~ 6·106 M-1 for apo- and 50·106 M-1 for
cap-saturated eIF4E [2]. On the contrary, the association
constant for the binding of m7GTP to eIF4E (Kas ~
100·106 M-1) decreases twice upon prior incubation of WT
eIF4E with 4E-BP1.
Here, we compare the interactions of 4E-BP1 and of a
cap analogue m7GTP with WT eIF4E and its two mutants,
W102A
and
W56A/W102A,
using
analytical
ultracentrifugation and fluorescence titration. The
mutations in the cap binding pocket weaken the affinity of
eIF4E for m7GTP at least three orders of magnitude, both
for the apo- and for 4E-BP1-saturated eIF4E. Unlike in
the WT eIF4E, the interactions of mutated eIF4E with 4EBP1 are not enhanced by m7GTP.
Our studies show that correct orientation of m7GTP in
the eIF4E binding slot is necessary for cooperativity
between the cap and 4E-BP/eIF4G binding sites of eIF4E.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The analytical ultracentrifugation experiments were
performed in the NanoFun laboratories co-financed
by the European Regional Development Fund within the
Innovation Economy Operational Programme, Project No.
POIG.02.02.00-00-025/09. This work was supported by
Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education, No.
BST 173300/BF (to A.M.-W, R.S., and K.Z.), and by
Polish National Science Centre, No. UMO2012/07/B/NZ1/00118 granted to Edward Darzynkiewicz
(to J.Z. and A.S.).
REFERENCES
[1] Sonenberg, N & Hinnebusch, A.G. (2009). Regulation of
translation initiation in eukaryotes: mechanisms and
biological targets. Cell 136, 731–745.

[2] Modrak-Wojcik A., Gorka M., Niedzwiecka K., Zdanowski K.,
Zuberek J., Niedzwiecka A. & Stolarski R. (2013). Eukaryotic
translation initiation is controlled by cooperativity effects within
ternary complexes of 4E-BP1, eIF4E, and the mRNA 5’ cap.
FEBS Letters 587, 3928–3934.

COMPARISON OF GLASS TRANSITION
TEMPERATURE OF BOVINE SERUM ALBUMIN
RESULTING FROM DIRECT AND INDIRECT
METHOD.
K. Monkos
Department of Biophysics, School of Medicine with the Division of
Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, H. Jordana 19, 41808 Zabrze 8, Poland

The results of viscosity determinations on aqueous
solutions of bovine serum albumin (BSA) at a wide range
of concentrations and at temperatures ranging from 5 oC to
45oC are presented. Viscosity-temperature dependence of
the BSA solutions is analyzed based on the formula
resulting from the Avramov’s model. One of the
parameters in the three parameters Avramov’s equation is
the glass transition temperature T g. It turns out that the Tg
of BSA solutions increases monotonically with increasing
concentration. The glass transition temperature of a
solution depends both on Tg for a dissolved dry protein
Tg,p and water Tg,w. To obtain the glass transition
temperature of the dry BSA, a modified Gordon-Taylor
equation is used. This equation describes the dependence
of Tg of a solution on concentration, and T g,p and a
parameter “k” depending on the strength of the proteinsolvent interaction are the fitting parameters. Thus
determined the glass-transition temperature for the dry
BSA is equal to (255 ± 12) K and the parameter k =
(0.855 ± 0.169). Very recently it has been demonstrated
experimentally that the glass transition phenomenon
actually occurs in dry BSA [1]. The authors measured the
mean-square atomic displacement <x2> in lyophilized
BSA powder by using the incoherent inelastic neutron
scattering method. Anomalous temperature behavior of
both the mean-square atomic displacement and vibrational
and relaxational dynamics, revealed that the glass-like
transition occurs in the dry BSA in the vicinity of 250 K.
As seen, the thus directly obtained glass transition
temperature of dry BSA is consistent - within
experimental error – with the value deduced indirectly
from the method proposed in the present work.

REFERENCES
[1] Frontzek A.V., Strokov S.V., Embs J.P., Lushnikov S.G.
(2014). Does a dry protein undergo a glass transition?. J.
Phys. Chem. B 118, 2796-2802.

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
ROTATIONAL CORRELATION TIME FOR SOME
MAMMALIAN SERUM ALBUMINS IN DILUTE
SOLUTIONS DEDUCED FROM THE MAXWELL
EFFECT.
K. Monkos, J. Młynarski
Department of Biophysics, School of Medicine with the Division of
Dentistry in Zabrze, Medical University of Silesia, H. Jordana 19,
41-808 Zabrze 8, Poland

Rotational correlation time is commonly used as a source
of information about dynamic behavior of proteins in
solution. It can be determined both for the side chains of
the protein and for the protein as a whole. In the latter
case, the rotational correlation time is called the overall
motion correlation time. It may be experimentally
obtained by using the Maxwell effect consisting in
simulated birefringence in liquids or solutions induced by
the mechanical force like shear stress in a streamline flow.
For protein in diluted solutions it can be calculated if the
intrinsic viscosity, molecular mass and the axial ratio of
the protein is known. The intrinsic viscosity has been
measured
using
an
Ubbelohde-type
capillary
microviscometer immersed in a water-bath controlled
thermostatically for several mammalian serum albumins.
Measurements were carried out in a temperature range
between 5oC and 45oC. The thus obtained numerical
values of the overall motion correlation time are in the
following range: from 134 ns (5oC) to 39.9 ns (45oC) for
bovine serum albumin, from 107 ns (5 oC) to 34.6 ns
(45oC) for rabbit serum albumin, from 101 ns (5 oC) to
32.4 ns (45oC) for ovine serum albumin, from 90.1 ns
(5oC) to 28.2 ns (45oC) for equine serum albumin and
from 89.3 ns (5oC) to 28.8 ns (45oC) for porcine serum
albumin. The pH values of the examined solutions were:
at the isoelectric point for bovine serum albumin solutions
and outside of the isoelectric point for the other albumins
solutions. The above results suggest that the overall
motion correlation time of a protein reaches a maximum
value in the solution at isoelectric point.

DIETARY FIBRE-INDUCED CHANGES IN THE
STRUCTURE AND THERMAL PROPERTIES OF
GLUTEN PROTEINS STUDIED BY FT-RAMAN
SPECTROSCOPY AND THERMOGRAVIMETRY
A. Nawrocka, A. Miś, M. Gancarz, R. Rusinek,
Z. Niewiadomski
Department of Physical Properties of Plant Materials, Institute of
Agrophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Doswiadczalna 4,
20-290 Lublin, Poland.

Interactions between gluten proteins and dietary fibre
supplements at the stage of bread dough formation are
crucial in the baking industry. The dietary fibre additives
are regarded as a source of polysaccharides and
antioxidants, which have positive effects on human
health. The fibre enrichment of bread causes significant
reduction in its quality, which is connected with changes

49

in the structure of gluten proteins. Changes in the
structure of gluten proteins and their thermal properties
induced by seven commercial dietary fibres were studied
by FT-Raman spectroscopy and thermogravimetry (TGA),
respectively. For this aim the bread dough at 500 FU
consistency was made of blend of the wheat starch and
wheat gluten as well as the fibre, the content of which
ranged from 3 to 18% w/w. The obtained results revealed
that all dietary fibres apart from oat caused similar
changes in the secondary structure of gluten proteins. The
most noticeable changes were observed in the regions
connected with hydrogen bonded β-sheets (1614 and 1684
cm-1) and β-turns (1640 and 1657 cm-1). Other changes
observed in the gluten structure, concerning other βstructures, conformation of disulphide bridges, and
aromatic amino acids microenvironment, depend on the
fibres chemical composition. The results concerning
structural changes suggested that the observed formation
of hydrogen bonds in the β-structures can be connected
with aggregation or abnormal folding. This hypothesis
were confirmed by thermogravimetric results. Changes in
the weight loss indicated formation of a more complex
and strong gluten network.

THE INFLUENCE OF HUMAN INDIVIDUAL
FEATURES ON POSTURAL STABILITY
G. Olchowik1, A. Czwalik1, M. Tomaszewski2
1

Department of Biophysics, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin,
Poland
2
Department of Human Anatomy, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin,
Poland

Balance disorders affecting 20% to 30% of adults and 8%
to 18% of children increase risk of falls and are associated
with raised morbidity and mortality. The prevalence of
balance disorders tends to increase with age and agerelated degenerative processes. Identification of factors
associated with worse body balance control in young
asymptomatic adults plays an important role in prevention
of falls in the elderly.
Gender, height, BMI index and lateral dominance may
affect the complicated connection between sensory
system and motor control system [1-3].
Assessment of possible relationships between these
factors and human balance system can allow to
distinguish between individual determinants and disease
symptoms. Useful tool to determine these symptoms is
Computerized Dynamic Posturography (CDP) which
allows an objective and quantitative evaluation of sensory
inputs to balance control and coordination of postural
responses [4].
The aim of this study was to determine the differences
while maintaining body balance based on the gender,
height, BMI index and laterality profile of young, healthy
people using Computerized Dynamic Posturography.
The study approved by The University Ethics
Committee was conducted in the Department of
Biophysics of Medical University of Lublin in the group

50

Posters

of 202 healthy, asymptomatic subjects (101 women and
101 man) aged 20 – 26 years. Body balance control was
evaluated using the EquiTest dynamic posturography
produced by NeuroCom International Inc.. During
sensory organization test (SOT) equilibrium score, motor
strategy, centre of gravity alignment was evaluated in six
sensory conditions. Also the usefulness of visual,
vestibular and somatosensory system and visual
preference were measured. Motor control test (MCT)
analysed the latency and amplitude of postural response,
and adaptation test (ADT) determined the sway energy.

REFERENCES
[1] Oliveira C.B., Medeiros I.R.T., Greters M.G., et al. (2011).
Abnormal sensory integration affects balance control in
hemiparetic patients within the first year after stroke.
Clinics, Sao Paulo, 66:2043-2048.
[2] Wu E., Ji L., Jin D., Pai Y. (2007). Minimal step length
necessary for recovery of forward balance loss with a single
step. J Biomech, 40: 1559-1566.
[3] Olchowik G., Tomaszewski M., Olejarz P., et al. (2015).
The human balance system and gender. Acta Bioengin
Biomech, 17: 69-74.
[4] Nashner
L.M.
(1993b). Computerized
Dynamic
Posturography. [In:] Jacobson G.P., Newman C.W., Kartush
J.M., ed. Handbook of balance function testing. St Louis:
Mosby Year-Book: 280-307

STEADY-STATE AND TIME-RESOLVED
AUTOFLUORESCENCE SPECTROSCOPY OF
HUMAN BRAIN GLIOMA AND MENINGIOMA
TUMORS
P. Orłowski1, K. Woźniak2, J. J. Fisz1
1

Biomedical Photonics Laboratory, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium
Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Bydgoszcz, Poland
Antoni Jurasz University Hospital No 1, Ludwik Rydygier Collegium
Medicum, Nicolaus Copernicus University, Bydgoszcz, Poland

2

Brain tumors are the abnormal growths of cells in the
central nervous system (CNS). The most common
primary brain tumors are gliomas and meningiomas, apart
from the other ones (e.g., pituitary adenomas and
craniopharyngiomas). The Glioblastoma multiforme
(GM), one of the gliomas cases, characterizes by
especially aggressive course and unfavorable prognosis.
For this reason, this brain cancer subtype has been
subjected to very systematic investigations for a long time
now.
In this communication we want to demonstrate the
application of DUV- and UV-excitation steady-state and
time-resolved autofluorescence spectroscopy to gliomas
and meningiomas. The main information content of both
spectroscopic techniques, towards their prospective
clinical applications, is exemplified and discussed. We
display a particular value of the spectrally- and timeresolved autofluorescence studies at DUV- and UVexcitations, indicating that, very likely, this technique may
occur to be an effective in vivo diagnostic method

enabling to differentiate between the brain cancer types
and subtypes. In the clinical practice, the brain cancer
types and subtypes become known from the routine
histopathology.

THE INTERACTIONS BETWEEN ACRIDINE
ORANGE AND SELECTED FLAVONOIDS
A. Osowski, A. Kasparek, M. Szabelski,
Z. Wieczorek
Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Warmia and
Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland

Polyphenols are one of the most frequently consumed
alkaloids worldwide. In most studies of natural
antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic compounds, their
activity is ascribed to their antioxidant properties.
However, apart from free radical capture, many of such
substances can intercept aromatic compounds which
intercalate DNA.
This study compares the intercepting properties of few
polyphenolic derivatives (catechin, epigallocatechin
gallate, quercetin, rutin and resveratrol). We checked
these interactions via spectroscopic titrations for each
compound
with
a commonly used cellular mutagen – acridine orange
(AO). We wanted to know if there’s any possibility
polyphenolic compounds to prevent the intercalation
process, which takes a cytotoxic and cytostatic effects.
The association constants Ka were determined by a
method based on Evstigneev’s equations [1]. To define if
our polyphenols are capable to de-intercalate an acridine
orange from the DNA structure, we measured changes in
absorption (Cary 5000, Varian), fluorescence (Cary
Eclipse, Varian) and fluorescence lifetimes (FluoTime
200, Pico
Quant) spectra of the mixtures
containing DNA and AO during titration with
polyphenols.
The data indicate, that chosen polyphenolic derivatives
are able to bind some amounts of AO, which confirms
them to act as an intercepting molecules. For example, in
order to bind 50% acridine orange at 1µM concentration
in
a complex, a twenty-fold excess of resveratrol is needed
[2]. Performed studies seem to be interesting for a
pharmacological and medical branch. Moreover, they
could be used by food manufacturers to enrich their
products with such ingredients.

REFERENCES
[1] Evstigneev V. P., Mosunov A.A., Buchelnikov A.S.,
Hernandez Santiago A.A., Evstigneev M.P. (2011).
Complete solution of the problem of one-dimensional noncovalent non-cooperative self-assembly in two-component
systems. J. Chem. Phys., 134, 194902.
[2] Osowski A., Pietrzak M., Wieczorek Z., Wieczorek J. (2010).
Natural compounds in the human diet and their ability to bind
mutagens prevents DNA-mutagen intercalation. J. Toxicol.

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
Environ. Health A., 73, (17-18): 1141-9.

THE SIMPLE COMPETITION MODEL IN A
THREE COMPONENT SYSTEM: HYPERICINE –
ACRIDINE ORANGE – DNA

51

analyzed by light absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy
and molecular dynamics simulations. Chem. Phys. Letters,
601: 39-44.

M. Pietrzak, Z. Wieczorek

VISCOSITY OF SUPERCOOLED LIQUIDS CAN
BE MEASURED BY MEANS OF FLUORESCENCE
CORRELATION SPECTROSCOPY

Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Warmia and
Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland

A. Połatyńska, M. Pochylski, J. Gapiński,
A. Patkowski

The simple competition model [1,2] is based on
competition between molecules of DNA and the
interceptor for resources of DNA intercalator. The more
intercalator molecules bind to the interceptor, the less
DNA adducts are formed. The model uses the association
constants values of intercalator – DNA and intercalator –
interceptor interactions.
It was investigated how hypericin – a natural compound
synthesized by plants of the Hypericaceae family –
proves itself in the role of an interceptor molecule.
Hypericin has many medical applications. It is widely
used as a herbal anti-depressant and as a cholagogic and
digestion-enhancing agent. Hypericin is a potential drug
in photodynamic therapy too. It may, however, affect the
metabolism of other orally-administered drugs. The
mechanisms of these interactions may involve the
formation of stacking complexes with other flat, aromatic
molecules [3].
Hypericin is insoluble in water. Buffers with DMSO
contents of 20%, 30%, 40% and 50% were used to enable
dissolution of hypericin in water. The association
constants of hypericin and a model intercalator – acridine
orange – were determined in respective buffers using
spectroscopic methods. Values of the association
constants depend on DMSO concentration in a mixture.
The association constant of acridine orange – DNA
interaction was determined earlier (Pietrzak at al. 2006).
The application of the simple competition model made
it possible to estimate how the presence of hypericin
affects the concentration of the DNA – acridine orange
complex in a three-component system: acridine orange –
DNA – hypericin. To reduce the concentrations of the
DNA – acridine orange complex by 50%, about sevenfold excess of hypericin relative to the acridine orange
concentration is required.

Department of Physics, Adam Mickiewicz University, Umultowska 85,
61-614 Poznań, Poland

REFERENCES
[1] Xie H. P., Jiang J. H., Chu X., Cui H., Wu H. L., Shen G. L.,
Yu R. Q. (2002). Competitive interaction of the antitumor
drug daunorubicin and the fluorescence probe ethidium
bromide with DNA as studied by resolving trilinear
fluorescence data: the use of PARAFAC and its modificatin.
Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 373: 159-162.
[2] Pietrzak M., Wieczorek Z., Wieczorek J., Darzynkiewicz Z.
(2006). The “interceptor” properties of chlorophyllin
measured within the three-component system: intercalator DNA- chlorophyllin. Biophys. Chem., 123, 11-19.
[3] Pietrzak M., Maciejczyk M., Szabelski M., Kasparek A.,
Wieczorek Z. (2014). Self-association of hypericin

During the past 25 years there has been
a remarkable growth in the development of various
experimental techniques
connecting fluorescence
phenomena with optical microscopy. One method
of particular importance is Fluorescence Correlation
Spectroscopy (FCS). With this technique the selfdiffusion coefficient of fluorophore molecule can be
measured with high spatial resolution offered by confocal
microscope. The ability to investigate molecular
concentration, mobility and interactions on the subcellular level made FCS a powerful tool used mostly in
monitoring of biochemical activity occurring in biological
environments.
The scientific potential of FCS goes well beyond the
established biophysical applications. The possibility
of performing direct measurement of the self-diffusion
coefficient, together with application of theoretical
Stokes-Einstein relation, gives a tool for obtaining
information on the size of fluorescent tracer particle, as
well as the local physicochemical properties
of liquid, namely its temperature and viscosity.
In this work we show how FCS technique can be used
to
determine
the
temperature
dependence
of viscosity of the molecular glass-forming liquid orthoterphenyl (OTP). The measurements were performed in
broad temperature range starting from high temperature
conditions well above liquids melting point, down to
super-cooled metastable state of the system. In the
temperature range covered, the viscosity of OTP changed
by 3 orders of magnitude showing characteristic departure
from simple arrhenian dependence.
The presented work demonstrate how the utilization of
optical technique (as FCS) provides viscosity data that not
only agree very well with the published ones, but also can
fill the gaps in existing literature results from standard
viscosimetric methods.

THEORETICAL STUDY OF TAUTOMERIC
EQUILIBRIA OF AMINO FORMS OF
8-AZAPURINES
M. Pyrka1, M. Maciejczyk1,2
1

Department of Physics and Biophysics, Faculty of Food Science,
University of Warmia and Mazury, ul. Oczapowskiego 4,
10-719 Olsztyn, Poland

52
2

Posters

Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Protein Engineering, International
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
ul. Ks. Trojdena 4, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland

Tautomeric equilibria of amino forms of 2,6–diamino-8azapurine and 8-aza-iso-Guanine (efficient fluorescence
probe) molecules is revealed by Density Functional
Theory computations both in the gas phase and in water.
The most populated tautomer of 2,6–diamino-8azapurine, in agreement with available experimental data
[1,2], is protonated at position N(9). The lowest free
energy tautomer of 8-aza-iso-Guanine is protonated at
positions N(3) and N(8), both in the gas phase and in
water. For biologically more important tautomer,
protonated at position N(9), the probability of protonation
at position N(3) is slightly higher than protonation at
position N(1). This result, observed also for isoGua [3],
shows reversed probability of protonation at position N(3)
and N(1) compared to results obtained for Guanine. This
subtle effect may be responsible for experimentally
observed decreased specificity of base-pairing observed in
the expanded genetic code and it should also be expected
for expanded genetic code in which isoGua is replaced by
the fluorescence probe - 8-aza-iso-Guanine.

molecular analyses of gene expression profiles. We
evaluated molecular events associated with apoptosis
induced by Epothilone B (EpoB, Patupilone) and
paclitaxel (PTX) in OV-90 cells. Epothilones are
compounds of natural origin with mechanisms of action
similar to taxanes, but with more potent antiproliferative
activity. The mode of cell death was assessed
colorimetrically, fluorimetrically, cytometrically through
assessing the activation of caspase-9, -8 and -3. We
measured markers of apoptosis, like phosphatidylserine
externalization and morphological changes. EpoB and
PTX mediate activation of both initiator caspases-8 and 9, leading to the appearance of caspase-3. We have found,
that antitumor efficacy of this new drug is related to its
apoptosis-inducing ability. The greatest changes in
morphology of cells were noted after treatment with EpoB
(after 48 h, 32% of apoptotic cells). A lower level of
apoptotic cells was determined for PTX (27%, 48 h). In
summary, we report that Epothilone B induces apoptosis
in OV-90 cells via caspase 8-dependent pathway.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by grant N N405 100939 of
the Ministry of Science and Higher Education, Poland.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors would like to thank Prof. Jacek Wierzchowski,
Dr. Hab Bogdan Smyk and Dr. Grzegorz Mędza for
valuable discussions.

REFERENCES
[1] Mędza G., “Spectroscopic Properties and Tautomerization
of Chosen 8-Azapurines”, Ph.D. Thesis University of
Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn 2014.
[2] Wierzchowski J., Antosiewicz J. M. & Shugar D. (2014). 8Azapurines as isosteric purine fluorescent probes for
nucleic acid and enzymatic research. Molecular
BioSystems, 10, 2756-2774.
[3] Blas J. R., Luque F. J., Orozco M. (2004). Unique Tautomeric
Properties of Isoguanine. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 126, 154-164.

EPOTHILONE B INDUCES HUMAN OVARIAN
CANCER OV-90 CELL APOPTOSIS
A. Rogalska, A. Marczak
Department of Medical Biophysics, Institute of Biophysics, Faculty of
Biology and Environmental Protection, University of Łódź, Pomorska
141/143, 90-236 Lodz, Poland

Ovarian cancer is the leading cause of death from
gynecologic. The common form of cancer of the ovary is
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). Ovarian serous
carcinomas (OSCs) as epithelial subtypes, correspond to
75% of all cases. This EOC cell line (OV-90), derived
from the cellular fraction of ascites from a chemotherapynative patient, has been well characterized by
morphological, immunohistochemical, cytogenetic, and

SPECTROSCOPIC STUDIES OF CHLOROPHYLL
IN YELLOW LUPIN GROWING IN SOIL
CONTAMINATED WITH CIPROFLOXACIN
D. Rydzyński1,2, H. Grajek2, A. I. Piotrowicz-Cieślak1
1

Department of Plant Physiology, Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty
of Biology and Biotechnology, University of Warmia and Mazury in
Olsztyn, Oczapowskiego 1A, 10-718 Olsztyn, Poland
2
Department of Physics and Biophysics, Faculty of Food Science,
University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, Oczapowskiego 4, 10-719
Olsztyn, Poland

Antibiotics, including diverse fluoroquinolones are a
group of frequently detected environmental contaminants
[1,2]. Ciprofloxacin (CIP, 1-cyclopropyl-6-fluoro-4-oxo7-piperazin-1-yl-quinoline-3-carboxylic acid, C17H18
FN3O3)
belongs
to
the
second
generation
fluoroquinolones. It is widely used in medicine and
veterinary medicine [3]. The aim of the study was to
demonstrate the effect of increasing doses of
ciprofloxacin and the time of exposure of plants to
contaminated soil on chlorophyll degradation.
The spectroscopic studies of the absorption and
fluorescence spectra of chlorophyll extracts derived from
yellow lupin (Lupinus luteus L.) plants growing on a
substrate polluted with increasing concentrations of 3; 9;
15; 30; 90 mg ciprofloxacin/kg soil. The chlorophyll
extraction with methanol was carried out three, five,
seven and ten days after antibiotic was used. Distinct
changes in the chlorophyll absorption spectra indicated
that the degradation of chlorophyll occurred. Absorption
levels dropped with increasing concentration of antibiotic
in the substrate, and with the time of plant exposure to

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016

53

antibiotic. At the antibiotic concentration of C =3 mg / kg
of soil chlorophyll absorbance decreased from A = 1.0 to
0.75 and A= 0.6 after three and ten days of exposure,
respectively. When the concentration of antibiotic was 90
mg / kg of soil absorbance value decreased to 0.55 and
0.35 after three and ten days, respectively. Reduction in
the chlorophyll concentration in the plants was observed
from 7.34 ×10-5 M for the control to 2.6 ×10-5 M (65%) in
plants subjected for ten days to ciprofloxacin, 90 mg / kg
of soil. The shift of fluorescence spectra and decrease in
their intensity with increasing CIP concentration
confirmed degradation of chlorophyll occurring in plants.
The reaction kinetics of the chlorophyll degradation
was examined. It was shown that it is the second order
reaction. Rate constants chlorophyll degradation were
determined: k = 870 M-1 day-1 for using CIP at 3 mg / kg,
and k = 2490 M-1 day-1 for CIP dose of 90 mg / kg of soil.

than 100 oncology center in Europe.
In parallel with development of anticancer therapy,
significant progress has been achieved in developing
electroporation for intracellular delivery of nucleic acids.
Attempts has been devoted both in characterizing
mechanisms of gene electrotransfer and in optimizing the
protocols in many preclinical trials. Recently this has led
to initiating clinical trials of gene electrotransfer to treat
metastatic melanomas. Further progress of the method in
various clinical trials requires better understanding of
mechanisms of gene electrotransfer. Our current study
aims to elucidate these mechanisms for further
development of the method for gene therapy.

REFERENCES

S. Sekowski1, M. Ionov2, M. Bitiucki1,
N. Abdulladjanova3, S. Mavlyanov3, M. Bryszewska2,
M. Zamaraeva1

[1] Speltini A., Sturini M., Maraschi F., Profumo A. (2010).
Fluoroquinolone antibiotics in environmental waters:
sample preparation and determination. J. Sep. Sci., 33,
1115–1131.
[2] Speltini A., Sturini M., Maraschi F., Profumo A., Albini A.
(2011). Analytical methods for the determination of
fluoroquinolones in solid environmental matrices. Trends
Anal. Chem., 30, 1337–1350.
[3] Picó Y., Andreu V. (2007). Fluoroquinolones in soil—risks
and challenges. Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 387, 1287–1299.

DRUG AND GENE DELIVERY INTO CELLS
USING CELL ELECTROPORATION
S. Šatkauskas
s.satkauskas@gmf.vdu.lt;
Biophysical research group, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Vytautas
Magnus University, Vileikos 8, Kaunas, LT-44404 Lithuania

Cell exposure to external electric fields can lead to
increase of membrane permeability which is related to
formation of transient hydrophilic pores. The
phenomenon is known as cell electroporation. The
number and size of the pores can be controlled by
electrical parameters of electric field pulses. Under well
controlled conditions electroporated cell can restore
membrane barrier function and therefore electroporation
can be compatible with high percentage of cell survival.
Cell electroporation allows intracellular delivery of
various hydrophilic non-permeant molecules. Our
research has revealed that electroporation can be
exploited for facilitated anticancer drug bleomycin
delivery and enhance cellular cytotoxicity of bleomycin
up to 700 times. These achievements have paved the way
for preclinical tumor therapy studies, which revealed that
electroporation reduces tumor growth and tumor size
when combined with chemotherapy. This new approach is
called
antitumor
electrochemotherapy.
Currently
antitumor electrochemotherapy is implemented in more

BIOPHYSICAL MECHANISMS AND FACTORS
RESPONSIBLE FOR PROTEIN-TANNIN
INTERACTIONS

1

Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, Department of Biophysics,
Faculty of Biology and Chemistry, University of Bialystok,
Bialystok, Poland
2
Department of General Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and
Environmental Protection, University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland
3
Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Academy of Science of Republic of
Uzbekistan, Tashkent, Uzbekistan

Tannins belong to plant polyphenols with strong
antioxidant, antitumor, anti-inflammatory, antibacterial
activity. They can strongly interact with proteins, lipids,
polysaccharides or alkaloids [1].
The tannins interaction and binding with proteins
depend on many various factors and have different
mechanisms. One of the most important is protein and
tannins structure. Globular tertiary structure of proteins
gives lower ability to bind tannins in comparison with
much more flexible proteins with extended random coil
structure. The interaction depends on amino acid
composition too. Proteins rich in proline have greater
affinity to tannins. Haslam [1] demonstrated that not only
the number of hydroxyl groups but the bulk, flexibility
and hydrophobicity of tannins play important role in
protein tannin interactions .
In our studies we investigated the interaction between
proteins and tannins isolated from Central Asia plants
in order to clarify how the unique structure of these
compounds affect these impacts .In our experiments we
demonstrated that two tannins: bihexahydroxydiphenoyltrigalloylglucose
(BDTG)
and
1-O-galloyl-4,6hexahydroxydiphenoyl-β-d-glucose (OGβDG), isolated
from Geranium sanguineum and Oenothera gigas leaves
possess different affinity to human serum albumin (HSA).
Smaller OGβDG stronger quenched albumin fluorescence
in comparison with larger BDTG indicating that the
chemical structure and size strongly influence tanninprotein interactions [2]. Both tannins quenched
fluorescence via the “sphere of action” mechanism (when
the quencher-fluorophore complex is immediately

54

Posters

quenched, without the formation of a ground-state
complex [3]).
Our other research revealed that 3,6-bis-О-di-О-galloyl1,2,4-tri-О-galloyl-β-D-glucose (C55H40O34) from Rhus
typhina has very strong affinity to alfa-synuclein (protein
that plays a crucial role in etiology of Parkinson disease
[4] and inhibited α-syn aggregation as was shown by
circular dichroism method. Strong interaction between
C55H40O34 and alfa-synuclein is probably the result of
linear protein structure allowing much better binding of
tannin in comparison with globular structures.
Our latest investigations shown that tannins isolated
from Euphorbia E. Turcestanica (1,2-di-O-galloyl-4,6valoneoyl-β-D-glucose, 2-O-galloyl-4,6-valoneoyl-β-Dglucose and 3-O-galloyl-1,2-valoneoyl-β-D-glucose)
possess valoneoyl groups that makes them stiffer in
comparison with rather flexible gallotannins quenched
HSA fluorescence via static mechanism.
Obtained results allow to conclude that not only bulk,
flexibility and hydrophobicity of tannins but also position
of hydroxyls groups determines the strength of tanninsproteins interactions.

REFERENCES
[1] Haslam E.(2007). Vegetable tannins – Lessons of a
phytochemical lifetime Phytochemistry 68, 2713–2721.
[2] Sekowski S., Ionov M., Kaszuba M., Mavlyanov M.,
Bryszewska M., Zamaraeva M.(2014). Biophysical studies
of interaction between hydrolysable tannins isolated from
Oenothera gigas and Geranium sanguineum with human
serum albumin Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 123,
623–628.
[3] Soares S., Mateus N, De Freitas V.(2007). Interaction of
Different Polyphenols with Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA)
and Human Salivary α-Amylase (HSA) by Fluorescence
Quenching J. Agric. Food Chem. 55, 6726-6735
[4] Recchia A., Debetto P., Negro A., Guidolin D., Skaper S.D.,
Pietro Giusti P.(2004). α-Synuclein and Parkinson’s disease.
FASEB 18, 617-626

SENSITIVE DETECTION OF FLAVONES ON
PLASMONIC PLATFORMS
1

2*

2

I. Serdiuk , P. Bojarski , A. Synak ,
B. Grobelna1 , I. Gryczynski3
1

Faculty of Chemistry, University of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 63, 80-308
Gdansk, Poland
2
Institute of Experimental Physics, Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and
Informatics, University of Gdansk,
Wita Stwosza 57, 80-952 Gdansk, Poland
3
Center for Commercialization of Fluorescence Technology, University
of North Texas, Health Science Center,
3500 Camp Bowie Boulevard, Fort Worth, TX 76107, United States
*
corresponding author: fizpb@ug.edu.pl

Metal nanoparticles have numerous potential applications
ranging from biological to chemical sensing. In particular,
the use of the phenomenon of the Metal Enhanced
Fluorescence (MEF), which offers a way to increase
brightness and photostability at the same time was

investigated [1]. The ability to increase intensity of
fluorescence is strongly dependent on the size and shape
of the nanoparticles. In this work we present the
enhancement of the emission for new plasmonic platform
for three different compounds which belong to group of
hydroxyflavones. Hydroxyflavones (hydroxy-2-phenyl4H-chromen-4-ones) have been one of the most important
compounds for investigations and applications of ESIPT
[2]. In this study plasmon resonance effect on the ESIPT
systems is investigated for the first time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research has been supported by the grants
2015/17/B/ST5/03143
(P.B.,
A.S.,
B.G.)
and
2014/13/N/ST4/04105 (I.S.) financed by National Science
Centre.

REFERENCES
[1] Sørensen T. J., Laursen B. W., Luchowski R., Shtoyko T.,
Akopova I., Gryczynski Z., and Gryczynski. I. (2009)
Enhanced Fluorescence Emission of Me-ADOTA by SelfAssembled Silver Nanoparticles on a Gold Film, Chem.
Phys. Lett. 476, 46–50.
[2] Bader A. N., Pivovarenko V. G., Demchenko A. P., Ariese
F., Gooijer C. (2004) Excited State and Ground State Proton
Transfer Rates of 3-Hydroxyflavone and Its Derivatives
Studied by Shpol’skii Spectroscopy: The Influence of
Redistribution of Electron Density. J. Phys. Chem. B, 108,
10589-10595.

EFFECT OF DIBUTYL PHTHALATE ON THE
FORMATION OF OXIDATIVE STRESS AND DNA
DAMAGE IN BLOOD MONONUCLEAR CELLS
P. Sicińska, I. Malczyk, M. Koter-Michalak
Department of Biophysics of Environmental Pollution,
University of Łódź
Address: 141/143 Pomorska St., 90-236 Lodz.

Phthalates are derivatives of phthalic acid and its
corresponding salts. Phthalates are used in plasticizers,
where they are added to the products to give the material
flexibility, transparency and durability. Thus, they have
been determmed in many plastic products, cosmetics,
perfumes and drugs.
The widespread occurrence of phthalates in the
environment endanger human health. Phthalates including
dibutyl phthalate (DBP) disrupt hormonal balance and
function of the liver and kidneys. They also negatively
effect on nervous and immune system, and cause adverse
effects on reproduction. Phthalates have also been shown
to cause allergies, asthma and tumor development.
Moreover, toxic effects of phthalates may contribute to
oxidative modification of lipids, proteins and DNA.
DBP has been classified as the substance highly
dangerous to the environment and human. For this reason
it was banned in toys and cosmetics intended for children.

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
Nevertheless, there is no appropriate limitation for this
compound for use of the products in adults.
The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of
DBP on peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
PBMC is a good experimental model as this cell type is
significantly exposed to xenobiotics and it plays a crucial
role in the immune system.
In this work cell viability, ROS level (using fluorescent
labels) and oxidative DNA damage (using comet assay) in
human PBMCs incubated with DBP (5 - 1000μg/ml) for
12 h were assessed.
The study showed that DBP at 250 μg/ml caused a
decrease in cell viability by 23%. It was also noticed that
DBP from the concentration of 100 μg/ml and 50 μg/ml
caused an increase in ROS level (by 15%) and lipid
peroxidation (by 20%), respectively. Moreover, DBP was
shown to oxidative DNA damage in the incubated cells.
The emergence ROS can lead to oxidative DNA damage
in human PBMCs

55

of tocopherol have been measured using absorption and
fluorescence
spectroscopy.
Simultaneously,
the
temperature of crystal/fluid transition of membrane for
investigated systems has also been estimated applying
measurements of fluorescence anisotropy of DPH.
In conclusions, from the results of our experiments
follows that presence of Ag nanoparticles in the liposome
membrane does not significantly affect the photostability
of tocopherol. Neither increase nor decrease in
photostability of tocopherol has been detected as a result
of interactions with nanoparticles. However, small shift in
phase transition temperature of DPPC bilayer, in presence
of tocopherol and Ag nanoparticles in the membrane have
been recorded. In the case of Ag loaded membrane the
decrease in phase transition temperature of DPPC
compared to unmodified liposomes and with embedded
tocohpherol has been observed.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
THE INFUENCE OF SILVER NANOPARTICLES
ON PROPERTIES OF VITAMIN E LOCATED IN
DPPC LIPOSOMES

The work has been supported by Poznan University of Life
Sciences funds (no 507.782.57).A fluorescence can be easily
detected and studied.

P. Siejak, G. Neunert, K. Polewski
Department of Physics and Biophysics, Faculty of Food Sciences and
Nutrition, Poznań University of Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland

Metal nanoparticles (especially silver and gold) are
considered as perspective material for antibacterial and
anticancer purposes in medicine, cosmetology, food
packaging etc. From literature it is known, that
hydrophobic functionalized silver or gold nanoparticles
can be introduced successfully into lipid bilayer and
change its properties.
The DL- -tocopherol is known as most important
ingredient of vitamin E and recognized as antioxidant and
anticancer agent. The antioxidant performance of
tocopherol decreases as the result of UV illumination.
In this study we have examined systems consisting of
DL- -tocopherol embedded into bilayer membrane of
liposomes with added decanethiol functionalized silver
nanoparticles. The aim was to determine how the
interactions with silver nanoparticles immobilized within
membrane bilayer alter the tocopherol and membrane
properties. Special emphasis was put on the relation
between photodegradation of tocopherol and changes in
temperature of membrane phase transition.
As a model of cell membrane we have used DPPC
liposomes (100 nm in diameter). The incorporation of
tocopherol and Ag nanoparticles has been performed in
organic solutions of DPPC in chloroform and tocopherol
and Ag in hexane. After preparation the mixtures of above
compounds in organic solvents, the solvents were
evaporated and formed film has been hydrated with
phosphate buffer at pH 7,4 under mixing.
Systems consisting of DL-a-tocopherol and DL-atocopherol/Ag in DPPC liposomes have been illuminated
with UV light (290 nm) and changes of spectral properties

STEADY STATE AND TIME-RESOLVED
FLUORESCENCE STUDY OF METHYL ESTER OF
SINAPIC ACID IN WATER ENVIRONMENT
B. Smyk1, G. Mędza1, A. Kasparek1, M. Pyrka1 and
I. Gryczynski2
1

Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Warmia &
Mazury, Oczapowskiego 4, 10-719
Olsztyn, Poland.
2
Department of Cell Biology and Immunology, Center for Fluorescence
Technologies and
Nanomedicine, University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort
Worth, TX 76107, USA.

Sinapic acid is widespread compound in plant foods. Recently,
methyl ester of sinapic acid (MESA) has attracted attention
due to their antioxidant activity. This phenolic ester can act
either in water or nonpolar environment. In alkaline solutions
proton from OH group connected to benzene ring, can
dissociate. The aim of this work was to investigate
physicochemical properties of MESA in buffer solutions
ranged from 5.9 to 10.7. Acid-base equilibrium of this group
has been established based on absorption spectra. In alkaline
solution this compound was not stable; therefore spectrum of
completely ionized OH group of MESA was calculated. pKa
of this group was 8.6 ± 0.3. Fluorescence spectra of each form
of MESA were measured using appropriate wavelength of
excitation. We estimated quantum yield (QY) values at
different pH using standard compound of quinine sulfate in
0.1N H2SO4 (QYS=0.54). For not dissociated form of MESA,
QY = 1.8 x 10-3 and for dissociated form QY = 6.2 x 10-4.
Fluorescence lifetimes were measured using spectrometer with
TCSPC module and MCP PMT detector. Source of excitation
were PLS diode (340 nm) and laser diode (375 nm). The
observation was set at 460 nm and 500 nm wavelength, at the

56

Posters

maximum of fluorescence spectrum of each form of MESA.
Decays were reconvoluted with the excitation pulse resulting
in lifetimes of 10.3 ± 1.3 ps and 3.0 ± 1.6 ps for not dissociated
and dissociated form of MESA respectively. Although
quantum efficiencies are low and lifetimes are very short,
MESA fluorescence can be easily detected and studied.

coenzymes: fluorescence and biological activity. CRC
Critical Revs Biochem., 15, 125-199.
[3] Leonard, N.J. (1985). Adenytates: bound and unbound,
Biopolymers, 24, 9-28.
[4] Stachelska-Wierzchowska, A., Wierzchowski, J., Bzowska, A.,
Wielgus-Kutrowska,
B.
(2016)
Molecules,
21,
doi:10.3390/molecules21010044.

ENZYMATIC RIBOZYLATION OF TRI-CYCLIC
NITROGEN BASES USING PURINE-NUCLEOSIDE
PHOSPHORYLASE AS A CATALYST

SELECTIVE RIBOSYLATION OF FLUORESCENT
NUCLEOBASE ANALOGS USING PNP AS A
CATALYST

A. Stachelska-Wierzchowska1, J. Wierzchowski1,
A. Bzowska2, B. Wielgus-Kutrowska2

A. Stachelska-Wierzchowska1, J. Wierzchowski1,
A. Bzowska2, B. Wielgus-Kutrowska2

1

Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Varmia &
Masuria, 4 Oczapowskiego St., Olsztyn, Poland
2
Division of Biophysics, Warsaw University, 96 Żwirki & Wigury St.,
Warsaw, Poland

Department of Physics and Biophysics, University of Varmia &
Masuria, 4 Oczapowskiego St., Olsztyn, Poland
2
Division of Biophysics, Warsaw University, 96 Żwirki & Wigury St.,
Warsaw, Poland

We have examined enzymatic ribosylation of tri-cyclic
nitrogen bases, including 1,N6-ethenoadenine and linbenzohypoxanthine using various forms of purinenucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) as catalysts and αribose-1-phosphate (r1P) as a second substrate.
We have found that 1,N6-ethenoadenine (εAde) is
rapidly ribosylated by the E. coli PNP (wild form) in
phosphate-free media, with α-ribose-1-phosphate (r1P) as
a second substrate (ribose donor). The main product of
this reaction is the highly fluorescent etheno-adenosine
(εAdo), although small amounts of the less intensely
fluorescent N7-riboside can also be fund. The Km for this
reaction was found ~20 μM.
Mutation at the 204 residue (Asp→Asn) of the E. coli
PNP is known to nearly abolish all the activity except the
phosphorolysis of N7-methylguanosine [1]. Surprisingly,
this mutation has only little influence on the ribosylation
of εAde, and its reversal (phosphorolysis of εAdo). The
mutated (Asn243Asp) calf enzyme is quite effective in the
ribosylation of εAde, although the product of this reaction
was certainly not the typical N9-riboside.
Another tri-cyclic base which was examined as a
potential PNP substrate was lin-benzohypoxanthine,
introduced by Leonard [2,3]. Although it was not a
substrate for the calf enzyme, a fairly rapid reaction was
observed when the wild-type E. coli enzyme was used.
Recently we have shown that both the E. coli and calf
PNP, as well as their mutants, can be used as catalyst in
the syntheses of many typical and non-typical ribosides,
with possible analytical applications [4]. This work
demonstrates that this is also possible for some tri-cyclic
bases as well.

Enzymatic ribosylation of fluorescent 8-azaguanine and
2,6-diamino-8-azapurine,
with
purine-nucleoside
phosphorylase (PNP) as a catalyst, leads to N9, N8, and
N7-Ribosides [1].
We have observed modulation of the final proportion of
the products, which was effect of point mutations in the
enzyme active site. Wild-type of the calf PNP gives N7and N8-ribosides, while the mutated form of PNP (the
N243D mutant) led to the ribosyl substitution at N9- and
N7-positions. The N243D mutant allows synthesis of the
fluorescent N7-β-D-ribosyl-8-azaguanine.
The N7- and N8-ribosides of the 8-azapurines can be
are analytically useful, for example N7-β-D-ribosyl -2,6diamino-8-azapurine is a good fluorogenic substrate for
mammalian forms of PNP and can be used as a specific,
fluorogenic substrate for detection of PNP activity in
human blood, while the N8-riboside is highly selective to
the E. coli enzyme [2].

REFERENCES
[1] Mikleušević, G., Štefanić, Z., Narczyk, M., WielgusKutrowska, B., Bzowska, A., Luić, M. (2011). Validation of
the catalytic mechanism of Escherichia coli purine
nucleoside phosphorylase by structural and kinetic studies,
Biochimie 93, 1610-1622.
[2] Leonard, N.J. (1984). Etheno-substituted nucleotides and

1

REFERENCES
[1] Stachelska-Wierzchowska A., Wierzchowski J., WielgusKutrowska B. and Mikleušević G. (2013).Enzymatic
synthesis of highly fluorescent 8-azapurine ribosides using
purine-nucleoside phosphorylase reverse reaction: variable
ribosylation sites. Molecules 18, 12587-12598.
[2] Stachelska-Wierzchowska, A., Wierzchowski, J., Bzowska, A.,
Wielgus-Kutrowska, B. (2016). Site-Selective Ribosylation of
Fluorescent Nucleobase Analogs Using Purine-Nucleoside
Phosphorylase as a Catalyst: Effects of Point Mutations
Molecules, 21, doi:10.3390/molecules21010044.

INTERACTION OF ACYLATED AND NONACYLATED ANTHOCYANINS WITH CELLMIMIC MEMBRANES AND HUMAN ALBUMIN
P. Strugała, A. Dudra, H. Kleszczyńska, J. Gabrielska
Department of Physics and Biophysics, Wrocław University of
Environmental and Life Sciences, C.K. Norwida 25, 50-375 Wrocław,
Poland

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
Anthocyanins exhibit numerous pharma- cological
activities such as anticancer, ant-atherosclerotic,
antioxidant, anti-inflammatory properties, etc. [1].
The aim of the work was to determine the effect of
acylated and non-acylated anthocyanins on cell-mimic
membranes that reflect the membrane lipid composition
of tumor cells. In addition, the anthocyanin derivatives
capacity to make bonds with the main blood
transportation protein – the human serum albumin and its
antioxidant activity was studied. Using fluorescent
probes, the effect of anthocyanin derivatives on the
properties of the hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions of
mimetic membranes was determined. Antioxidant activity
was tested with fluorimetric methods with free radicals
induced by AAPH compound. Determination of binding
of anthocyanins with albumin was carried out by
following the quenching of albumin fluorescence and
using the Stern-Volmer equation.
The results of the study have shown that acylated and
non-acylated anthocyanins have high biological activity.
It has been demonstrated that, all the compounds cause a
decrease in the packing order of the hydrophilic region of
the tumor-cell mimic membrane. Acylated anthocyanins
also showed greatest affinity to the membrane and caused
a small decrease of fluidity within its hydrophobic
interior. It can be concluded that acetylation at carbon 3 of
the glycosyl moiety can be considered the primary
determinant for the significant lipid membrane
interaction. The results also shows that studied
anthocyanin derivatives can bind to human serum
albumin and quench its fluorescence. The process of
binding of all the compounds to albumin is a static
quenching mechanism and the main forces are the van der
Waals and hydrogen bonding forces. The determined
parameters of the binding of anthocyanins to albumin are
essential in the description and understanding of the
pharmacokinetics of these substances in the human blood.
The results of this research suggest a close relationship
between antioxidant activity, that depends on the
molecular structure of anthocyanin derivatives, and
structural changes in the membranes tested, as well as at a
possible mechanism of their anticancer activity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by fund of the statutory
activities of the Department of Physics and Biophysics of
Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences.

REFERENCE
[1] Clifford M.N. (2000). Anthocyanins – nature, occurrence
and dietary burden. J. Sci. Food Agric., 80, 1063-1072.

57

THE ROLE OF MELATONIN AND RESVERATROL
IN THE RADIATION INDUCED STRUCTURAL
AND FUNCTIONAL CHANGES OF RABBIT
GAPDH AND LDH
J. Strunillo, K. Nowak, A. Rodacka, M. Puchala
Division of Radiobiology, Department of Molecular Biophysics, Faculty
of Biology and Environmental Protection, University of Lodz, ul.
Pomorska 141/143, 90-238 Lodz, Poland

The abundance of proteins in the cell makes them a
primary target to redox modifications during oxidative
stress. Most of such modifications have a deleterious
effect to protein structure and function and so oxidatively
modified proteins are present in several disorders
including age-related diseases.
Protein especially sensitive to reactive oxygen species
(ROS) modifications is glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH). This glycolytic enzyme has
plenty of unrelated functions including its role in
apoptotic death of neurons during oxidative stress
conditions. Moreover, oxidatively altered, aggregated
GAPDH is frequently found as a component of amyloids
in Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. One of the
strategies to prevent unwanted redox modifications is
employing antioxidants scavenging ROS and aiding selfdefense antioxidant properties of the cell. Resveratrol and
melatonin are naturally occurring direct free radicals
scavengers and compounds that activate several cell
antioxidant enzymes.
Here, we discuss the effect of radiation induced
oxidative stress on the structure and function of two
glycolytic proteins: GAPDH and lactic dehydrogenase
(LDH). Protein solutions were irradiated with X-rays in
the atmosphere of air with the dose rate 21 Gy/min
determined using Fricke method of dosimetry. Radiations
doses applied to protein samples ranging from (10.5-105)
Gy for GAPDH and (52.5-630) Gy for LDH.
Secondly, we verified functional changes of both
enzymes upon its interactions with radiation generated
ROS and in the presence of resveratrol and melatonin
respectively. We observed higher inactivation rate of
GAPDH compare to LDH and the general protective
effect of both used antioxidants in studied conditions. To
investigate structural changes of the irradiated proteins we
applied high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). Study of the obtained chromatograms revealed
that oxidative stress destroys quaternary structure of both
proteins in the dose depended manner. Furthermore, we
were able to investigate the degree of binding both
resveratrol and melatonin to native and oxidatively
modified GAPDH and LDH. Finally, we investigate
hydrophobicity changes of GAPDH and LDH exposed to
X-radiation in the presence and absence of melatonin and
resveratrol using fluorescence probe bis-ANS.

58

Posters
HYBRID DENDRIMERS
AND ANTI-APOPTOTIC
siRNAs – COMPLEX FORMATION
A. Szwed1, K. Milowska1, R. Gomez-Ramirez2,
F. J. De La Mata2, M. Bryszewska1, T. Gabryelak1

1
Department of General Biophysics, Faculty of Biology and
Environmental Protection, University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland
2
Departamento Química Orgánica y Química Inorgánica, Universidad de
Alcalá, Alcalá de Henares, Spain

RNA interference is a selective cellular mechanism of
gene silencing. In this case the degradation of the mRNA
is caused by the small interfering RNA – siRNA.
However, silencing of a gene requires the delivery of
siRNA to cells in an active form. For this purpose, the
effective, non-toxic and selective carrier that can protect
the siRNA particle is needed. Under investigation as
nucleic acid delivery vectors are e.g. cationic dendrimers
[1].
The
cationic
carbosilane-viologen-phosphorus
dendrimers generation 1st and 2nd were synthesized using
novel “onion peel” approach. Those hybrid dendrimers
have two kinds of cationic groups: those located at the
branches due to viologen quaternized units and those
related to the ammonium groups at the surface of
carbosilane wedges [2].
The aim of the study was to check out whether 2
generations
of
carbosilane-viologen-phosphorus
dendrimers can form the complexes with anticancer
siRNAs: siBcl-xL, siBcl-2, siMcl-1 and scrambled
sequence. The complexes were characterized using
fluorescence quenching, zeta potential and circular
dichroism methods.
The results have shown that formation of complexes
occurs between all of anticancer siRNAs and carbosilaneviologen-phosphorus dendrimers both generations.
However the complexes have been formed at different
dendrimer/siRNA molar ratio. Furthermore, the obtained
results reveled that in presence of heparin the siRNA is
disassociated from dendrimers.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by NANOGENE - FP7PEOPLE-2012-IRSES of 7th FP, Marie Curie Actions and
financed by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education
of Poland (project No. W21/7.PR/2013).

REFERENCES
[1] Dzmitruk V., Szulc A., Shcharbin D., Janaszewska A.,
Shcharbina N., Lazniewska J., Novopashina D., Buyanova
M., Ionov M., Klajnert-Maculewicz B., Gómez-Ramirez R.,
Mignani S., Majoral J. P., Muñoz-Fernández M. A.,
Bryszewska M. “Anticancer siRNA cocktails as a novel
tool to treat cancer cells. Part (B). Efficiency of
pharmacological action”. Int J Pharm. 2015 May 15;485(12):288-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2015.03.034. Epub 2015
Mar 18.

[2] Moreno S., Szwed A., El Brahmi N., Milowska K.,
Kurowska J., Fuentes-Paniagua E., Pedziwiatr-Werbicka E.,
Gabryelak T., Katir N., de la Mata J., Muñoz-Fernández M.
A., Gomez-Ramirez R., Caminade A. M., Majoral J. P.,
Bryszewska M. ‘Synthesis, Characterization and Biological
Properties of New Hybrid Carbosilane-ViologenPhosphorus Dendrimers’. RSC Adv., 2015,5, 25942-25958,
doi: 10.1039/C5RA00960J

PLASMA PROTEIN LEVEL AFTER
PROTEASOME ACTIVATION DUE TO THERMAL
INJURY.
M. Tylicka1, E. Matuszczak2, M. Karpińska1,
W. Dębek2, M. Ciszyński3
Department of Biophysics, Medical University of Białystok,
Mickiewicza 2A, 15-089 Białystok, Poland
b
Department of Pediatric Surgery, Medical University of Białystok,
Waszyngtona 17, 15-274 Białystok, Poland
c
Medical University of Białystok, 15-089 Białystok, Poland
a

Severe injury, including thermal injury, causes catabolic
response which is characterized by whole-body protein
loss associated with changes in protein metabolism in
multiple organs and tissues. Intracellular protein
degradation is regulated by multiple proteolytic
mechanisms, among which an important role plays
proteasome-dependent proteolysis. Proteasome is a
multicatalytic proteinase complex localized in cytosol and
nucleus of all eukaryotic cells which is responsible for
degradation of misfolded, denaturated, damaged, oxidized
or improperly translated proteins. Controlled protein
degradation by the proteasome is an important and
efficient way to remove nonfunctional proteins arising in
the course of the burn disease.
The aim of this study was to investigate changes in the
proteasome activity and total protein level in the plasma
of children with moderate and major burns during their
hospitalization, and also to evaluate the proteasome role
in the protein degradation.
The study was performed on 35 children managed at the
Department of Pediatric Surgery with moderate and major
burns (according to the pediatric injury severity score
used by American Burns Association) and on 20 healthy
volunteers as controls, sex and age-matched. Proteasome
activity in the plasma of children after burn injury was
assessed using
Suc-Leu-Leu-Val-Tyr-AMC peptide
substrate. Plasma protein level were determined by
standard biochemical laboratory procedures. Proteasome
activity and protein concentration in the plasma was
measured 2-6 h, 12-16 h, three, five and seven days after
injury.
Significantly higher proteasome activity in the plasma
of burned children than in controls was detected between
2-6 h, 12-16 h, on the third and fifth day after the injury.
The highest level was reached 12-16 h after trauma. There
was also a downward trend in the total protein
concentration between 2-6 and 12-16 h after burn and the
upward trend between 12-16 h and the seventh day of
hospitalization. The lowest value of the total protein level

Abstracts of the XVI Conference of the Polish Biophysical Society, Ryn, June 28 – July 1, 2016
in children plasma was noticed 12-16 h after burn injury,
so in the same time when proteasome activity was the
highest.
Thermal tissue injury initiates proteasome activation
which are involved in damaged protein degradation. The
most intense proteasome activation between 12-16 h is
accompanied by the largest decrease in the plasma protein
level. This indicates that proteasome play an important
role in the protein degradation during inflammatory
response to thermal injury.

59

