Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4190

S414

Coordination of AAL-Activities - a socio-technical Challenge
T. Herrmann,
Information- and Technology-Management, University of Bochum, Germany,
thomas.herrmann@rub.de

Abstract
Assistive systems for elderly people represent technical devices which are embedded into a technical infrastructure as
well as into organizational procedures. The interplay of these components requires the design and coordination of a
complex socio-technical system. Research and methodologies of socio-technical design can be transferred to the introduction of AAL-solutions. The design can be guided by drafting the process of sequenced activities being started by
certain events or conditions which indicate the relevance of technical support. Those activities, such as care taking,
emergency handling, providing social contact etc., include the collaboration of several roles, e.g. service providers,
medical experts, relatives, neighbours etc. They have to be identified and their rights and duties must be specified as
well as their competencies for dealing with the technical systems. Planning and modelling the socio-technical process
includes the decision who will configure the technical-solution, who will maintain it and who will use it. Especially the
degree of autonomy of the user to be supported has to be specified and is a matter of ethical considerations – e.g. who
will be allowed to establish audio- or video-connections. The process design also supports the decision about the necessary level of service agreement, the need and frequency of technical maintenance, and the intensity of external human
support which has to be combined with the technical solution. The planning of maintenance has to include needs for adaptation that occur when people learn to use of the technology more efficiently or when the physical or mental conditions of the supported person change. Taking all these factors (such as activities, services, roles, exchanged information,
conditions) and their interplay into account is decisive for the acceptance of technical assistance.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4191

S415

AAL in the curriculum of health technology degree program
Qualification at the interface between comfort and medical care in the home environment
Prof. Dr. Kurt Becker1, Prof. Dr. Elmar Erkens2
1
2

APOLLON Hochschule der Gesundheitswirtschaft GmbH, Bremen, kurt.becker@apollon-hochschule.de
APOLLON Hochschule der Gesundheitswirtschaft GmbH, Bremen, elmar.erkens@apollon-hochschule.de

Abstract
Modern technology plays a major role in all areas of daily life , but especially in the field of health care for the
population . Health technology is used in the prevention, diagnosis and treatment in medical care, but also in the
field of rehabilitation and aftercare. In recent years, the field of "Ambient Assisted Living " (AAL ) has evolved
tremendously. Many prototype applications are about to launch, and are increasingly being developed further.
The technology of AAL (which today means:    “everyday  supportive  assistance  solutions”)  is  not  only  concerned  
with very sick people. Initially comfort and assistance functions are provided for residents of people of all ages
(Smart Home). Another focus of AAL is to provide solutions for people with physical disabilities. Reflecting on
the lifecycle of facilities, it is usual that the resident of an apartment or of a house may become sick in another
way. In this case medical problems and conditions are relevant and secure communication between the home
and other health care locations services becomes more important. The APOLLON University in Bremen, with
funding from the German Federal Ministry for Research and Technology, has developed a bachelor's degree
program to qualify Managers in the field of health technology. The AAL aspects are contained both in the
general curriculum and in the elective part of the curriculum, so that a specific qualification in the direction of
AAL is integrated.

1

Objectives and market
positioning

The Goal of AAL technology is to be able to realize
more self-determination and to remain in the home
environment, in order for one to maintain the quality
of life and on the other hand to implement an
effective strategy to address demographic change.
Due to the high importance of health for individuals,
the German market for health care technology and
medical aids is a very attractive, but also a difficult
market. In addition, this health care market is not
homogeneous, but divided on closer inspection into
several sub-markets with different market rules [1]:
The first health care market in which
health is regulated as part of the German
health care system
The second health market in which
consumers and patients can actually act as
a client and can buy services and
medicines and medical aids as they and are
not subject to medical prescription or other
arrangements by German law.

The  understanding  of  the  term  “health  care” of most
actors, businesses and institutions engaged mainly
in the first healthcare market. This core area of the
healthcare industry includes reimbursable drugs
or hospital treatment. By the term "health economy"
we mean those actors, companies and institutions
assigned to the second health market in our
curriculum. This extended area of the healthcare
industry includes new goods related to health such as
fitness, wellness, sports goods, OTC (over the
counter) drugs, oral hygiene or personal health
services of physicians.
The first Healthcare market is what is referred to as
healthcare. This includes inpatient and outpatient
facilities and other providers funded by the statutory
health insurance. The second Health market is
financed primarily by the private payments of
consumers (patients) and includes services such as
wellness, privately purchased medical devices and
assistance systems.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4191

2

Assistance and care from the
perspective of citizens and
patients

From the perspective of citizens and patients, thus
the following strategic objectives for personal health
and the beneficial use of health technology (Becker
2012, p 74), yields with :
health in old age (perspective of a citizen) :
Healthy food
Healthy exercise
Healthy Lifestyles and
Healthy environment.
Measures: provision of information on healthy
living, sustainable self-development and
prevention services.
Rapid and sustainable recovery (perspective of a
patient):
Efficient and minimally invasive diagnostic
side-effect -free therapy and
fast recovery.
Measures: advice on the occurrence of disease
symptoms, special counseling for high-risk
groups and technical assistance in the choice of
therapy.
Preservation of quality of life (perspective of a
chronically ill patient):
Efficient and minimally invasive diagnostic
gentle and specifically-tuned continuous
therapy
use of technical possibilities and
integration in the home environment.
Measures: Continuous advice and support,
technical support in therapy selection,
contribution / deductible for cost-intensive
measures.
The health services are provided at three locations.
These are at first the outpatient and second the
inpatient areas. Citizens (the third location) and
patients are also saturated and well informed in the
field of personal health - as in other markets (for
example, telecommunications, energy). The citizen
is a real customer and significantly influenced by
markets and companies. Due to the demographic
change, the home environment for the provision of
health care services will be increasingly used. These
benefits may begin with hair-cutting and span to
nursing activities that can be provided more
effectively and efficiently by means of mobile
applications,

3

S416

Complex technical solutions
and interfaces

From a technical perspective, homecare solutions
and telemedicine solutions have to be assembled
here. It is still unclear to what extent the German
telematics infrastructure can be used for this
purpose. This is then also the point at which the
"Medical Informatics" (MI) plays an important role:
Home care , telemedicine and e- health , etc. are the
basis for medical devices in the home environment.
However, the methods and experience of the medical
computer science are only one part that is needed for
a successful implementation of new components and
modules. This makes the need for health technology
managers clear. APOLLON University has designed
a bachelor's degree program "Health Technology
Management" to better cover the increasing demand
for experts who are able to integrate these
technologies into the daily work processes and
effectively manage future challenges.
APOLLON University is also the coordinator of the
BMBF funded research project AApolLon with the
project partners IEKF, qcmed, locatesolution and
TMF. Results of the project work are a finished
curriculum and nearly completed Content. The focus
of the content of the curriculum is in relation to the
methods of e-health, telemedicine, AAL and
continuing medical and communication technology
including
their
overlaps,
boundaries
and
classification.

4

Summary

Due to the demographic development and also for
economic reasons, the areas of use and the benefits
of modern health technology in the coming years
will increase considerably. Health technology has
developed historically from different specialized
disciplines: medical computer science, telemedicine,
bioinformatics, e-Health and AAL.. These health
technologies are also increasingly being used outside
the direct medical applications in daily life.
The self-determined participation of the citizen in
the healthcare markets requires a more open
communication and provision of information and
services on today's sector boundaries. Efficient
management and use of modern health technology
support services in health care and the health care
industry. To meet the increasing demand for experts
who are able to integrate these technologies into the
daily work processes and economic sense the
APOLLON University leads to create the described
bachelor degree program. The goal is to train
Students to cover new challenges in the future.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4191

5

References

[1]
Becker K.; Customer Centricity and the
strategic elements in health care. In: MW Wilkes ,
Rod K.; Customer Centricity - Sustainable
corporate strategy in health care, Handelsblatt
publishing group 2012.

S417

This work is developed in the project "Distance
Learning concept AApolLon ", partly funded by the
German ministry of education and research
(BMBF) reference number: 16SV5805K within the
research program ICT 2020.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4192

S418

A Certified Qualification Course for AAL Consultants for Health Professionals and Services, Craftsmen and Technicians - Design, Results
and Perspectives
M Behrends1, M Nitschke2, T Kupka1, K Illiger1, M Marschollek1, J Krückeberg1
1
Peter L. Reichertz Institute for Medical Informatics, University of Braunschweig - Institute of Technology and Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, behrends.marianne@mh-hannover.de
2
Faculty of Diakonia, Health and Social Affairs, University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Hannover, Germany

Abstract
The article reports on the design, implementation and results of a certified qualification course for AAL Consultants. To
address the special challenges, different didactic methods were applied in the qualification for AAL consultants which
have been developed in the joint project MHH-QuAALi. Lectures, case examples, learning in interdisciplinary groups as
well as demonstrations of practical examples were used in the teaching. Thereby, the course was designed for different
occupational groups of health professionals, craftsmen and technicians. The results of the in-process evaluation show,
that the course and the various teaching methods were evaluated equal by the different professional groups. The results
also show that the interdisciplinary approach of the course reflects the requirements in the field of AAL and demonstrates the theme’s relevance in various professional fields.

1

Introduction

In the field of health-enabling technologies, especially in
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL), there are some challenges in the design of training courses: AAL technologies are
very diverse, but largely underrepresented on the market
[1]. AAL solutions must be adapted to the needs of the
users. In addition, AAL offers emerge from the collaboration of different professional groups [2]. Designing a
course for AAL consultants is a special challenge: It means
to combine the demonstration of tailored practical examples for the needs of the users and the promotion of interdisciplinary exchange.
The aim of our research work for this article is to report on
the design, implementation and results of a certified qualification course for AAL consultants which has been developed in the joint project MHH-QuAALi (grant number
16SV5554K) [3]. The project MHH-QuAALi is funded by
the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research
(BMBF).
The course for AAL concultants is designed for different
professional groups, such as health professionals, craftsmen and technicians. Due to the interdisciplinary composition of the modules, the question arises whether there are
differences in the valuation on the basis of the profession
of the participants. Therefore, we report on how the different teaching methods were evaluated by the participants
and whether the various professional groups evaluate these
differently. According to Steffan et al., it can not be assumed that people who work in the health sector, have a
more critical attitude towards technical aspects than
craftsmen oder technicans [4]. Steffan et al. observed that
nursing staff has a great technology acceptance, but differences were found in terms of sex and age. Therefore, different valuations of the modules due these terms can be
suspected.

1.1

Didactic structure and content of the
course

The training course is organized in two modules, a basic
and an advanced module. Each course consists of 40 lessons per week. The basic module was conducted four
times, the advanced module three times.
To get a thorough understanding of the complexity of
AAL, a curriculum with the following topics was developed: demographic change, the characteristics of the AAL
target group, technological basics, funding opportunities,
critical aspects and consulting training.
To address the special challenges in the teaching of topics
on health technologies, different teaching methods were
applied in the course for AAL consultants [5]. Lectures,
case examples, learning in interdisciplinary groups as well
as demonstrations of practical examples in interactive
theme rooms were used. For the case examples we wrote
short stories of people with the need of health service support. Each working group received a different case and
consisted of four to five persons with different professional
backgrounds. For the demonstrations of practical examples
we created different theme rooms with some playful and
interactive examples. E.g., a Wii console and a balance
board could be tested with and without an age explorer
suit.
These different methods were only applied after the first
basic module that due to early stage of development of the
didactic curriculum mainly consisted of lectures.
Moreover, a consulting training was carried out in the advanced module and in both modules e-learning offerings
were introduced [6]. The role of e-learning offerings and
their evaluation will not be deepened here. The effects of
the e-learning offer on the various didactic methods will be
examined separately. The focus of this study rests on the

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4192

results of the basic module. In many cases participants
from different basic modules attended advanced modules
and so different previous experiences may have influenced
the evaluation results of the advanced modules. For this
reason, we only use the results of the four basic modules.
Since the training courses have been carried out several
times, the evaluation results from different groups are
available.

2

Methods

With an in-process evaluation we investigated how the
participants evaluated the different didactic methods. For
the evaluation, a six-point-scale from 1 (very helpful) to 6
(not helpful) was used. The results of the four basic modules were investigated. Thereby, following aspects of all
modules are compared: didactic concept, content structuring, vocational relevance and the total valuation. Subsequently, the evaluation results of the various teaching
methods in the basic modules two, three and four are compared: the lectures, the work with case examples, the learning in interdisciplinary groups and the demonstrations of
practical examples in interactive theme rooms. We investigate whether there are differences between the professional
groups and between women and men. The discrimination
in various professional groups was based on the information in the evaluation questionnaires. Participants were
able to assign one of the following professional groups:
craftsmen and technicans, out-patient care, in-patient care,
health and social service with patient contact and health
and social service without patient contact. Data was explored using ANOVA for the comparison of the modules
and nonparametric inference tests for the comparison of
professional groups and gender. We set statistical significance at alpha=.05. Post hoc tests were Bonferronicorrected.

3

Results

In the last two years, we organized four basic courses with
73 participants. Regarding the basic modules 2, 3 and 4,
evaluation results from 55 persons are available. The number of men and women is almost equal in all modules (Table 1). In all modules were few people younger than 30 or
older than 65. The two main groups were the 31 to 50
year-old and the 51 to 65 year old persons. In the basic
modules 2 and 3 both groups was well balanced. In the
basic modules 1 and 4, the number of younger participants
outweighed (Table 2).
Table 1: Gender of the participants (N=73)
BM 1 BM 2
BM 3
BM 4
female
7
8
9
11
male
6
10
7
9
total
13
18
16
20
missing
5
1

total
35
32
67
6

S419

Relatively few participants have assigned in the professional group “craftsmen and technicans”. Overall, 23 participants have not assigned in one of given professional
groups (Table 3).
Table 2: Age of the participants (N=73)
BM 1 BM 2
BM 3
BM 4
to 30
2
1
1
2
31 - 50
12
6
7
14
51 - 65
2
10
8
4
older
1
0
0
than 65
total
16
18
16
20
missing
2
1

total
6
39
24
1
70
3

Table 3: Professional groups of the participants (N=73)
BM1 BM 2 BM 3 BM 4 total
Craftsmen /
0
4
0
5
9
technicans
Out-patient care
3
0
4
1
8
In-patient care
1
0
1
0
2
Health service
with patient con1
2
3
4
10
tact
Health service
without patient
5
4
4
3
16
contact
others
8
4
4
7
23
several
0
4
1
0
5
nominations
total
18
18
17
20
73
The comparison of the mean values indicates differences
in the assessment of the basic module 1 compared to the
rest (Table 4). With respect to the aspects of didactic concept, vocational relevance and the total valuation, the basic
modules 2, 3 and 4 were rated on average more then one
point better than basic module 1. Only the content structuring in module 4 was equally evaluated as in module 1.
Table 4: Comparison of the four modules (BM 1, BM 2,
BM 3, BM 4)
BM 1
didactic
concept
content structuring
vocational
relevance
total valuation

BM 2

BM 3

BM 4

mean (N)

mean (N) mean (N) mean (N)

3.0 (17)

1.4 (18)

1.5 (17)

1.9 (20)

2.7 (15)

1.7 (18)

1.9 (17)

2.6 (20)

3.5 (17)

1.9 (18)

2.1 (17)

2.1 (20)

2.9 (15)

1.3 (18)

1.6 (17)

1.7 (20)

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4192

The significance testing confirms the differing evaluation
of module 1, but also shows that module 4 differs to the
modules 2 and 3 with respect to the content structuring.
The difference between the means is significant at the
level 0.05 (Table 5).
Table 5: Significance of the difference between the means
of the basic modules (BM) (Post hoc tests Bonferronicorrected)
Compared modules significance
BM 2
p<.001
didactic concept
BM 1
BM 3
p<.001
BM 4
p<.05
BM 2
p<.05
content
BM 1
BM 3
.123
structuring
BM 4
1.000
BM 2
p<.001
vocational
BM 1
BM 3
p<.05
relevance
BM 4
p<.001
BM 2
p<.001
total valuation
BM 1
BM 3
p<.001
BM 4
p<.001
The ratings of the teaching methods are very homogeneous
in the modules 2, 3 and 4. Across these courses, the lectures were rated with 1.5 on average, the case examples
with 1.4, the learning in interdisciplinary groups with 1.5
and the demonstrations of practical examples in interactive
theme rooms was rated with 1.9. (Table 6). For the evaluation of the theme rooms only values for modules 3 and 4
are available, as the rooms were used until the third module. A Kruskal-Wallis test shows no significant differences
between the evaluation results of the teaching methods in
the courses.
Table 6: Comparison of teaching methods
BM 2

BM 3

BM 4

mean
(N)

mean
(N)

mean
(N)

total

lectures

1.4
(18)

1.5
(17)

1.7
(20)

1.5
(55)

working with case
examples

1.3
(18)

1.6
(17)

1.3
(20)

1.4
(55)

learning in interdisciplinary groups
interactive theme
rooms

1.4
(18)

1.4
(17)

-

1.7 (19)

1.7
(20)
2.1
(20)

1.5
(55)
1.9
(39)

Comparing the professional groups, the Kruskal-Wallis
test shows no significant differences. Comparing women
and men, the Mann-Whitney-Test shows a significant difference in ratings of the work with case example (p<.05),
but no differences regarding the other teaching methods.
This difference in ratings of the work with the case example is rooted in module 4. There the women valued the
case work with 1.0 on average, the men with 1.6.

S420

Comparing the age, a Mann-Whitney-Test shows a significant difference between the participants in age from 31 to
50 and the participants in age from 51 to 65 regarding the
valuation of vocational relevance (p<.05). The older people group rated the vocational relevance in the basic modules 2, 3 and 4 with 1.7 on average, the younger ones with
2.2.

4

Conclusion

The comparison of the basic modules in table 4 shows that
the change in the didactic form has improved the course
considerably. In particular with regard to the didactic concept, the vocational relevance and the total valuation. The
reasons why in module 4 the content structuring was rated
worse than in the other modules can not be accurately determined. In module 4, there were some problems with the
network access at the start of the event, so that the teaching
was disrupted. But it is not clear whether these problems
had impact on the evaluation of the content structuring.
Nevertheless, the evaluation of the teaching methods remained stable during the other modules (table 5). The differences between men and women in basic module 4 with
respect to the casework can not be clarified with these
data. In basic module 4, the distribution between the sexes
is not different from the other modules (table 1). However,
in module 4 three women chose technicans and craftsmen
as professional group. In the other modules, no women
chose this group. Nevertheless, given the small number of
cases further investigations would be necessary.
Interesting is certainly that there were no differences between the various professional groups. However, it must
also be considered here, that 23 of 73 participants could
not be assigned to one of the given professional groups
(table 3). The evaluation of the job titles that indicated the
participants at the registration, show many different professional activities. In total people from more than 50 different professional groups participated in the courses.
Given this variety of different professional backgrounds of
the participants, the good evaluation results are particularly
encouraging. The interdisciplinary approach of the course
reflects not only the requirements in the field of AAL, but
also demonstrates the theme’s relevanvce in various professional fields. Interdisciplinary training courses, at least
in the field of AAL, bring benefits for all professional
groups. Assumed, enough time is available for the personal
exchange, e.g. by group work or interactive and playful
learning offers. Thereby it seems, the age differences
among the participants are the critical point in heterogeneous groups, not the different professional backgrounds.

5

References

[1] Schuldt J, Bluhm K. (2014) AAL-Bildungsangebote:
Ermittlung von Bedarfen und Erwartungen. In: Wohnen - Pflege - Teilhabe - Besser leben durch Technik,
7. Deutscher AAL-Kongress. Berlin, Offenbach. VDE
VERLAG GMBH.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4192

S422

[2] Buhr R. (2009) Die Fachkräftesituation in AALTätigkeitsfeldern. Perspektive Aus- und Weiterbildung. Institut für Innovation und Technik in der
VDI/VDE-IT, Berlin.
[3] Krückeberg J, Behrends M, Kupka T, Marschollek M,
Schulze M, Illiger K, Matthies HK, Schmeer R, Meyenburg-Altwarg I, Mascia M, Hübner U, Egbert N,
Goll S, Nitschke M, Kammeier D, Plischke M, Lumpe
AK. (2012) MHH-QuAALi – Interdisziplinäre, berufliche und akademische Weiterbildung im Bereich
AAL. Tagungsband des 5. Deutschen AALKongresses, 24.-25.01.2012 Berlin, VDE Verlag
GmbH, Berlin, Offenburg., 2012, CD-ROM.
[4] Steffan S, Laux H, Wolf-Ostermann K. (2007). Einstellungssache IT-gestützte Pflegedokumentation? Ergebnisse einer empirischen Untersuchung. PrInterNet
2/2007, S.94-105.
[5] Mascia M, Schmeer R, Krückeberg J, Behrends M,
Stiller G, Meyenburg-Altwarg I. (2013) "MHHQuAALi - Qualifizierung zum/zur AAL-Berater/in für
Gesundheitsberufe, Handwerk und Technik - Vorstellung des Curriculums und seiner Entwicklung", In Lebensqualität im Wandel von Demografie und Technik.
6. Deutscher AAL-Kongress. Berlin, Offenbach., pp.
1-4. VDE VERLAG GMBH
[6] Behrends M, Stiller G, Illiger K, Nitschke M, Egbert
N, Krückeberg J. (2013) E-Learning as Integral Part of
Teaching-Learning Processes in Continuing Education
for Ambient Assisted Living Technologies and Services. In: Biomed Tech 2013; 58 (Suppl. 1), Walter de
Gruyter · Berlin · Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-20134412

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4193

S422

Design and evaluation of a further education for persons working in AAL context
M. Heußner1, B. Löffler2, L. Schmidt2
Human-Maschine-System Engineering, University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany, M.Heussner@uni-kassel.de
2
Human-Maschine-System Engineering, University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany

1

Structure:

1. Introduction / 2. The design of the TAAndem further education / 3. Evaluating different
aspects of the TAAndem further education / 4. Next steps / 5. References

Abstract
The aim of the TAAndem-project is to develop a common further education for people from different kinds of
professions within the context of “Ambient   Assisted   Living”   (AAL). The further education is addressed to geriatric
nurses and craftsmen. The didactic method of tandem learning is applied, so people from various working fields can
learn with and from each other. In this paper we will present our concept and the steps of development following the user
centred design. Different aspects of the further education that are essential for the upcoming pilot run were tested among
potential participants. Methods used were requirement analysis, questionnaire surveys, qualitative expert evaluations and
empirical observations. The main result is that the didactic method of tandem learning is suitable for transmitting
knowledge to our target group. Several results are given in the following article.

1

Introduction

In the context of the demographic change technical
support will be very important for finding solutions to
deal with upcoming needs in care. Therefore, Ambient
Assisted Living (AAL) has become more and more
important during the last years [1]. At the moment
several solutions in the field of AAL are available for
end-users. Unfortunately a lot of people who might
profit from AAL-Systems do not know about them.
Another problem is the non-acceptance of existing
systems [2]. In addition to this people who will be
confronted with AAL in their jobs in future have no or
only little knowledge about AAL-technologies [3]. For
this reason the German Federal Ministry of Education
and Research is currently funding nine different
research projects dedicated to develop ways to inform
persons working in the context of AAL by designing a
further education. One of these projects is the
TAAndem-project [4].
The further education developed in the TAAndemproject is in the first step addressed to geriatric nurses,
craftsmen and other related professionals in either the
social or technical field. The didactic method of
tandem learning - known as a concept for learning
foreign languages – is applied. Using this method
people from various working fields can learn with and
from each other by forming pairs. In such a tandemteam - for example consisting of a geriatric nurse and a
craftsman – the geriatric nurse can share her
knowledge about the needs of elderly people with the
craftsman who also can inform her about the use of
technical systems [5].

The concept of the further education involves not only
in-class tuition, but also self-learning sessions (see
Image 1) offering more flexibility in time and location
to the learners. This concept is also known as blended
learning. An online platform in combination with a
serious game is used in the self-learning sessions [6].
The online platform contains a forum to enhance
exchange between the participants of the further
education.

Image 1: Illustration of the blended Learning concept
between the two tandem-partners  “care”  and  “craft”.
Several parts of our concept were evaluated by people
who represent our addressees to guarantee the success
of our further education.
This article deals with the description of the concept and
the results of our evaluations.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4193

2

The design of the TAAndem
further education

The TAAndem further education is addressed to persons
doing practical work. Therefore it was important to
design the further education with lots of practical
applications.
The in-class part consists of three seminar days divided
into two weekends with a two month self-study period
in between. Image 2 shows the basic structure of the
further education in form of a house. The three columns
represent the in-class part. This part contains an
introduction, an exhibition, sessions to different topics,
two guided TAAndem-exercises and a feedback session.
The bars at the base represent the self-studying using
the online platform, the serious game and the forum.
“Tandem   learning”   frames the complete further
education and is written on top of the house to show the
significance within our overall concept.

Image 2: Structure of the further education symbolized
by a house.

2.1

The in-class part of the TAAndemfurther education

The in-class part of the further education consists of six
thematically different sessions presented by experts in
their field. Two TAAndem-exercises give the
participants the chance to test and strengthen their
knowledge. An exhibition shows AAL-systems
available on the market as well as functional prototypes
and other demonstration material.
The first two days of attendance are on the same
weekend. On the first day the participants meet for the

S423

initial time. During this day the participants will get all
relevant information concerning the training.
Furthermore, they will learn about diseases and needs of
potential users of AAL-systems. After a lecture about
AAL-systems the participants will have the opportunity
to   take   a   look   at   “real   AAL-Systems”   within   a   show
room and get the opportunity to wear an age simulation
suit. Within this showroom, it is also planned that they
have to do little exercises in TAAndem-teams. On this
day it is important that the participants get to know each
other, but also that they get a feeling for the potential
end users and their needs and restrictions. The
participants are introduced to the topic of AAL and get
first practical contact to AAL-systems.
On the second day necessary advisory skills and
information about typical housing situations of the
elderly will be transmit to the participants. In the last
session of the second day the attendees will have the
chance to practically tighten their knowledge. For this
reason
so-called  
“TAAndem-exercises”  
were  
developed. In these exercises the attendees share their
knowledge through joint discussions. The form of
knowledge transfer in this case will be a guided
exchange among persons from different kinds of
professions, e.g. a care nurse and a craftsman. On this
day the participants get important knowledge about the
field of AAL and the chance to test their knowledge and
competences they gained so far in the tandem learning
setting.
After a self-study period of approx. two months, the
participants meet again for the last time on the third day.
On this day they will be informed about the legal
situation and possibilities of financing and be
confronted with ethical aspects of AAL-systems. We
thought it would be relevant to not only give the
participants information about the handy themes of law
and financing, but to also point out the important
relevance of ethics in the field of AAL.
The further education ends with a deepening of the
knowledge through  further  “TAAndem-exercises” and a
feedback session. Here the participants get the chance to
present their thoughts, discuss with each other and/or
the TAAndem-Team and to pass on their opinion. In the
end, the participants will be asked to fill in
questionnaires used for evaluating the training.
For five sessions (disease patterns and needs of the
elderly, advisory skills, housing, law and financing and
ethics) external experts could be hired as lecturers. All
of them are specialists in their field. For example the
session about disease pattern and needs of the elderly
will be held by an experienced geriatric doctor, the
theme   “housing”   will   be   presented   by   a representative
of the Chamber of Handicrafts, Kassel.

2.2
The self-study part of the TAAndemfurther education
The presence part of the further education is separated
by a two months long period of self-studying to give our

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4193

participants the opportunity to strengthen their
knowledge.
For this purpose we designed a special online platform
to which only the participants have access. The platform
contains an information pool, a serious game and a
forum.
Using the information pool the participants have the
opportunity to review the lectures and download
additional material from the specific modules.
In the serious game the user has to work on different
case studies within the context of AAL. One case study
for example is that of an old lady living alone and
having trouble with her health. The user is asked to take
up the role of an AAL-consultant and inform her and
her daughter about different suitable technological
solutions. In all case studies the user is introduced to a
scenario with the help of written dialogues. Videos are
used to transport additional information. In between the
user is asked to solve different exercises. The type of
exercise is either multiple-choice, drag & drop or
finding a mistake in a picture. A scale at the end of each
case study shows the performance.
The online platform is completed by a forum. Here the
participants have the chance to independently contact
each other, ask questions and exchange knowledge.

3

Evaluating different aspects of
the TAAndem further
education

To ensure the success of our further education it is
important to have close contact to our attendees during
the whole process of designing. On this account several
evaluations under different aspects were conducted.
Some of the results are shown below.

3.1

Requirements analysis

At the beginning of the TAAndem-project we have
conducted a requirements analysis among geriatric
nurses and craftsmen. For this reason we used two
nearly equal questionnaires. These were sent by post.
Our survey participants were 8 persons working in
ambulatory nursing sector (care nurses) and 9 persons
mainly working in the sanitary, heating and airconditioning industry (craftsmen) with an average age
of approximately 50 years. The nurses surveys were all
female and the craftsmen mainly male.
The requirements for designing the further education
derived from the results are:
The further education must be adapted to a very
heterogenous group of participants.
Within the group of craftsmen it will most likely
be possible to build on partially existing
knowledge about AAL.
Within the group of care nurses it will most likely
not be possible to build on existing knowledge
about AAL.

S424

It is mostly not possible to build on experiences in
e-learning for both groups.
It is necessary to ensure a simple operability of
the online platform so that persons with minor
technical knowledge can handle the e-learning
offer.
In our process of designing the further education we
have to take these requirements into account.

3.2

“AAL-Taster Day”

The further-training concept has to be developed from
scratch within the TAAndem-project. Our pilot run will
start in May 2014. Therefore we considered it necessary
to test especially the tandem learning and other aspects
with potential participants under real conditions as soon
as   possible.   For   this   reason   a   so   called   “AAL-Taster
Day”   took   place   at   the   University   of   Kassel   in   August  
2013.
We presented our concept to 25 persons (8 persons with
a technical background and 17 persons with a social or
care background) who participated in the event. Among
the participants were not only workmen and care nurses
but also representatives of local advice offices e. g. lifestyle counselling.
On the event the concept of the further education was
presented and the participants had the opportunity to try
and to give direct feedback. The TAAndem-exercises
were tested in two workshops with people from the two
different working fields. A computer could be used for
testing the online offer.
During   the   “AAL-Taster Day”   several   evaluations   in  
form of questionnaires were conducted to find
improvement possibilities which should be adapted
before the pilot run. The main results of these are
presented in the next sections.
To illustrate the functions of AAL-systems
demonstration material was shown in an additional
exhibition room. Furthermore the participants had the
opportunity to wear an age simulating suit.

3.2.1

TAAndem-exercises

Two different TAAndem-exercises were conducted
within two workshops. One of these exercises we called
“AAL-systems”.   The participants get information
material about available AAL-systems. The other we
called   “Case   Cards”.   The participants are asked to slip
into different roles. To realize the tandem learning a
balance between the representatives of the two
occupational groups should be achieved.
The  workshop  “AAL-systems”  lasted  95  minutes  and  12  
persons  participated,  while  the  workshop  “Case  Cards”  
lasted 70 minutes with 8 participants. After the
workshops the questionnaires were given to the
participants. As response format we primarily used a
five-point Likert scale orientated on school marks (1:
best mark).

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4193

As a main result nearly all participants fed back that the
way of learning through the TAAndem-exercises is
adequate (Case cards M: 1.38 ± 0.52, AAL-systems M:
1.33± 0.42) and practical (Case cards M: 1.25 ± 0,46,
AAL-systems M: 1.55 ± 0,83). An essentially aim of
tandem learning is stimulating a common discussion
among the participants. This was successful because the
discussions with the tandem-partner were seen helpful
for doing the exercises (Case cards M: 1.63 ± 0.52,
AAL-systemes M: 1.5 ± 0.22).
If we take the statistical averages of the answers of both
exercises into consideration most of the participants
found   the   exercise   “AAL-systems”   easier   to   do   than  
“Case  cards”  (Case  Cards  M:  2.63  ±  1.5,  AAL-systems
M: 1.27 ± 0.22). A major proportion of participants of
the  exercise  “AAL-systems”  (58  %) said to have learned
much more or more new knowledge than participants of
the   exercise   “Case   cards”   (28   %).   Therefore   we  
conclude that the two TAAndem-exercises need to be
revised before the pilot run.

3.2.2

Online-offering

In the self-studying phase a special online-offer will be
available for all participants.
On   the   “AAL-Taster Day”   we   asked 6 participants to
evaluate the online-offer by using the thinking aloud
method and a written questionnaire, using also a fivepoint Likert scale. On average the online-offer was
evaluated with 2.0 (± 0.63). The opportunity to have
online access to documents from home was perceived
positive (M: 1.3 ± 0.56).
Also the educational game with integrated case studies
was evaluated as appealing (M: 2.0 ± 0.89) and practical
(M: 1.5 ± 1.50). However the persons involved in the
test had moderate orientation within the serious game
(M: 3.0 ± 0.89). These findings were also confirmed by
the method of thinking aloud. So the serious game also
needs to be revised before the pilot run.

3.3

Further evaluations

In addition to the described evaluations some smaller
ones had been carried out with the educational game in
focus.
Two of them were qualitative expert evaluations with a
nearly similar interview guideline. Our experts were one
person from technical working field and one person
from care working field.
Case  studies  with  different  topics  (“Ethics”  and  “AALsystems”)  were  evaluated.  Each  expert  had  to  play  one  
of the case studies and gave an interview after that.
The   workman   played   “Ethics”.   The   main   result   of   the  
interview is that he saw little resemblance to his
occupational work. He recommends the integration of a
video in order to improve the understanding of the topic.
The   person   from   the   care   working   field   played   “AALsystems”.   Overall   she   thought   that   the   case   study   was  
too technical and less practical for her working field. To

S426

enhance understanding the functions of AAL-systems,
her idea was to give more examples near to daily life.
These expert interviews have given us important hints
for improvement possibilities in the educational game.
Those will be implemented before the pilot run.

4

Next steps

The major step in the near future will be the pilot run of
the TAAndem- further education. Yet, we already have
17 registrations from people of technical and care
working fields. Our aim is to allow 10 persons from
technical working field and 10 persons from care
working field to participate in our further education.
During the pilot run we will evaluate the whole concept
and subsidiary aspects of it.
The evaluation concept followed will be a design of a
panel survey on three different points in time with the
same persons. The first evaluation will be carried out
directly before the further education, the second directly
after and the third a certain time after it. This design
allows us to draw conclusions about the success of our
further education as we are able to compare the variety
of knowledge.
The project upon which this publication is based was
funded by the Federal Minister of Education and
Research under Project Number 16SV5765K.

5

References

[1]Krüger-Brand, Heike E.: Altersgerechte
Assistenzsysteme: Wohnst du noch oder lebst du
schon? Dtsch. Arztebl2013, 110(7): Deutsches
Ärzteblatt, 7/110, A-258 / B-241 / C-241
[2] Meyer, S. (Hrsg.): AAL in der alternden
Gesellschaft: Anforderungen, Akzeptanz und
Perspektiven: Analyse und Planungshilfe. Berlin,
Offenbach: VDE-Verlag, 2010
[3] Buhr, R.: Die Fachkräftesituation in AALTätigkeitsfeldern. Perspektive Aus- und Weiterbildung. Berlin: Institut für Innovation und Technik in
der VDI/VDE-IT, 2009
[4] BMBF: Aus- und Weiterbildung im Bereich
Altersgerechte Assistenzsysteme, pdf-Dokument,
2012, S. 15
[5] Webseite des Projektes TAAndem – AALWeiterbildung im Tandem: www.taandem.de,
19.03.2014
[6] Ackermann, L.; Heußner, M. & Schmidt, L.:
Expertenevaluierung durch die Methode des lauten
Denkens am Beispiel eines Online-Lernspiels. In:
Breiter, A. & Rensing, C. (Hrsg.): DeLFI 2013: Die
11. E-Learning Fachtagung Informatik der
Gesellschaft für Informatik e.V. (Bremen 2013).
Köllen, 2013 (GI-Edition Proceedings 218), S.
257–262

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4194

S426

Service Robotics Technologies to Support Care Staff
B. Graf, Fraunhofer IPA, Dept. Robot and Assistive Systems, Stuttgart, Germany, email: Birgit.graf@ipa.fraunhofer.de

Introduction
At a time when skilled staff are in short supply, it is essential to give consideration to the use of assistive systems in the
care sector. Service robots can make a significant contribution to relieving the pressure on care staff.

Requirements Study
In order to identify the demand of the care workers for support, a requirements study in an elderly care facility has been
conducted. This included interviews with members of the management and care workers as well as accompanying care
workers during their work. The requirement analysis showed that care workers would specifically welcome assistance
with their routine day-to-day activities, such as transport tasks and documentation. They also expressed the wish that
new assistive systems should help to reduce their physical workload – especially in relation to the lifting of persons. In
addition, it would be helpful if such systems could support and promote the independence of patients.

Solutions
The presentation will introduce several solutions that were designed and/or implemented by Fraunhofer IPA or their
project partners, specifically
a small and versatile transport vehicle able to independently pick up and transport containers and to assist care
workers on night shift by carrying out patrols for them,
a care trolley for automatically providing care staff with the necessary care utensils and documenting their use,
a new lifter equipped with additional assistive features making operation by the care personnel easier,
a service robot serving drinks to the residents.

Conclusion
It can be predicted that the first products for this area of application will be made available in the coming years – e.g.
transport robots or assistive systems equipped with robotic functions and easy-to-use control interfaces. In all cases,
these systems are controlled and used by humans and not robots that independently administer care to patients or make
their own decisions.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4195

S427

Mobile ECG-PPG combined Heart Rate Estimation using a wireless
Body Sensor Network
M. Pflugradt, Electronics and Medical Signal Processing, Berlin, Germany, Maik.Pflugradt@tu-berlin.de
R. Orglmeister, Electronics and Medical Signal Processing, Berlin, Germany, Reinhold.Orglmeister@tu-berlin.de

Introduction
Heart Rate Variabilty is a crucial parameter, which conveys important information about the physiological state of a patient and is of much interest, especially when captured over long time periods in 24 hours measurements. A large number of non-invasive approaches have been published, that present heart rate extractions from ECG or PPG signals and
are suited for on-line applications in wearable home monitoring systems [1-4]. As the outcome of these methods are seriously hampered by motion artifacts, we propose to apply a more robust multimodal approach, by deriving the heart
rate directly from the cross-correlation of the ECG and PPG signals.

Methods
The different ECG leads (Einthoven bipolar leads I, II and III, as well as precordial chest leads V1 – V6) and a transmissive captured Photoplethysmogram (PPG) have been recorded using two novel sensor nodes that are part of a whole
Body Sensor Network. The signals are synchronously sampled at 500 Hz and stored on a micro SD-Card. As both, the
ECG  and  PPG  are  the  result  of  the  heart’s  contraction,  we  propose  to  extract  the  mutual  information  by  means  of  the  
Cross-Correlation-Function (CCF) which is derived from blocks of three seconds.

Results
Five preliminary experiments of five minutes each have been conducted, where the subjects remained calmly sitting on
a chair. At predefined time instants motion artifacts were deliberately induced on the signals. With respect to the PPG
this was achieved by swinging the finger clip back and forth; disturbance on the ECG signal was provoked by applying
some pressure and rotational movements on the left arm electrode. As there are no disturbances on the right arm and left
leg electrode, ECG II is free of artefacts and is used as a reference signal to calculate the true heart rate. Table 1 presents the results in terms of the HR Mean Squarred Error (MSE) and HR Correlation Coefficient.
Data-set

MSE RR

MSE PP

MSECCF

CC RR

CC PP

CC CCF

I
0.914
0.123
0.023
0.54
0.61
0.87
II
0.126
0.067
0.009
0.79
0.78
0.97
III
0.202
0.568
0.008
0.66
0.62
0.972
IV
0.002
0.47
0.012
0.99
0.44
0.94
V
0.038
0.64
0.022
0.84
0.3
0.88
Table 1 Performance in terms of mean squared error (MSE) and correlation-coefficient (CC)
of the extracted heart rates. MSE RR: MSE of estimated HR derived by corrupted ECG, MSE PP:
MSE of estimated HR derived by corrupted PPG, MSE CCF: MSE of estimated HR derived by CCF
of corrupted ECG and PPG, the last three columns s PDF fonts are embeddedhow the corresponding CC.

Conclusion
In this work, a novel biosignal acquisition hardware has been used, allowing multi modal signal processing approaches.
It was shown, that a good estimate of heart rate could be extracted, even when the signal quality has fallen below a sensible level required by conventional peak detectors. As no complex calculations are involved, the algorithm can be implemented on energy critical systems like mobile sensor devices.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]

K. Nakajima, T. Tamura, H.Miike, Monitoring of heart and respiratory rates by photoplethysmography using a digital filtereing technique,
Elsevier, 1996
W.Johnston, Y.Mendelson, Extracting heart rate varia-bility from a wearable reflectance pulse Oximeter, Bi-oeng. Conf. Proc. IEEE 31st
Ann. North East, 2005
N. Selvaray, A. Jaryal, J.Santhosh, K.K. Deepak, S. Anand, Assessment of heart rate variability derived from finger-tip photoplethysmography as compared to electrocardiography, Journ. Med. Eng. & Techn. Vol.32 No.6, 479-484, 2008
G. Lu, F. Yang, J.A. Taylor,J.F. Stein, A comparison of photoplethysmography and ECG recording to ana-lyse Unauthenticated
heart rate variability in
healthy subjects, Journ. Med. Eng. & Techn. Vol.33 No.8, 634-641, 2009
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4196

S428

Assessment of the User Interface of Walking Aids: Force measurement at the Handle
L. Koscielniak, Medical Informatics and Biomedical Engineering, University of Applied Sciences, Stralsund, Germany,
lars.koscielniak@gmail.com
U. Hübner, Medical and Health Informatics, University of Applied Sciences, Osnabrück, Germany, U.Huebner@hsosnabrueck.de
M. Staemmler, Medical Informatics and Biomedical Engineering, University of Applied Sciences, Stralsund, Germany,
martin.staemmler@fh-stralsund.de

Introduction (14 pt bold)
Walking Aids (rollators) are quite often (25%) involved in falls of frail persons. However, there is only little information available on the onset of such falls. Carers assisting the person after the fall report a tumbled rollator which indicates that the person has issued enough force on the rollators handle to make it tumble.
This paper reports on the design of a modified handle for a rollators capable to measure the forces issued by the person
on the handle.

Methods (14 pt bold)
The original handle tube is cut and the opening of the tube is used to mount the modified handle. It consists of a solid
aluminium tube and allows for 3D force measurement by means of strain gauges. Vertical and lateral forces are detected
by properly positioned strain gauges on the surface of the tube with the sensitivity adjusted by the diameter of holes
drilled into the tube. To measure the forward/backward forces the modified handle includes an extension perpendicular
to the tube axis with a slit in order to allow for bending, which is detected by a set of strain gauges. Analysing the effect
of forces on the strain gauges in relation their location allows for separating these in 3D. Instrumental amplifiers and a
microcontroller (Arduino) are used for wireless recording of the force signals.

Results (14 pt bold)
Measurements with modified handle confirmed the design approach taken and the estimation of the elongation, which is
detected by the strain gauges. In addition, forces could be separated to all three dimensions. Recording worked well
(100Hz, 12bit ADC, 6 channels simultaneously for both handles).

Conclusion (14 pt bold)
The modified handles will be used to establish a baseline for normal use of walking aids followed by a parcour to assess
the change in forces for different surfaces and slopes.

Limited to a maximum of 300 words without any figures, tables, references or headlines.
Please upload only PDF files without password protection.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4197

S429

Challenges and Conceptual Design of a Headset for Home-based
Application of EEG-related Neurofeedback for Patients with ADHD
C. Goffin1, A. Janß1, S. Erlhofer1, T.J. Gaber2,3, E.-L. Knospe2,3, F.D. Zepf2,3, K. Radermacher1
1

Chair of Medical Engineering, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, Goffin@hia.rwth-aachen.de
Clinic for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen,
Germany
3
JARA Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen & Jülich, Germany
2

Abstract
EEG-based neurofeedback (NF) is considered to be an alternative treatment for symptoms related to attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). NF enables the patient to deliberately regulate his or her own brain activity. It is the
patient’s task to move a visual signal in a pre-determined direction by either concentration or relaxation, which
neurophysiologically corresponds to the modification of brain activity with regard to specific potentials (i.e., such as socalled slow cortical potentials [SCPs]). However, a considerable amount of sessions is often necessary in order to reach
a significant improvement with regard to specific ADHD related symptoms. Therefore, it is our goal to optimize
treatment, minimize session intervals and reach more patients by relocating NF-based therapeutic strategies into the
home environment. One of the main problems arising form this particular relocation is the correct placement and
fixation of EEG-electrodes, as well as their removal after NF-training. This particular procedure itself is currently rather
time consuming and affords significant training and expertise.
Therfore, a headset which can be adjusted to the patients’ individual size and shape of the skull and face, is to be
developed. The main challenges encountered here are 1. the reproducable placement of the CZ electrode and 2. the
adjustment of the position and angle of the EOG-electrodes in accordance with the patient’s profile whilst still
guaranteeing a neccessary contact pressure for optimal electrode performance. As the training has to be performed
regularily by children and depends on the user’s acceptance, the usability of the headset plays an important role in its
concept determination. There are already headsets for electrode positioning on the market, but non of these includes all
necessary EOG electrodes for necessary eye-movement correction.
A prototype with attached articulated electrode arms was constructed. To adapt the headset to the patient’s head and to
restrict the translational degrees of freedom a specific adaption mechanism was integrated. A nose-piece also used for
glasses was attached for reproducible positioning on the nose bone to limit rotational degrees of freedom. Preliminary
user tests showed promising results concerning the reproducability of the positioning and user acceptance.

1

Introduction

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of
the most common neuropsychiatric disorders starting in
childhood, and which frequently presents with problems
related to inattention, impulsivity and hyperactivity and
which is classified in the ICD-10 as hyperkinetic disorder
[1]. The prevalence of ADHD in Germany amounts for
about 5% of all children between 3 and 17 years [2] and
has increased by more than 300% between 1998 and 2001
[3]. Accordingly, the prescription rate of methylphenidate
(MPH) has increased by more than the ninefold since
1998 [4]. However, the high amount of side effects as
well as the considerable amount of non-responders to
treatment with MPH still limit the effect of medication
with MPH formulations [5], and also underline the need
for a multimodal treatment approach, which is also in line
with established clinical guidelines [6].

1.1

ADHD and Neurofeedback

Neurofeedback is an alternative treatment approach for patients with ADHD. In order to improve the patient’s symptoms affected children learn to modulate their own brain
electrical activity (EEG) by deliberately concentrating and

relaxing in accordance with the direction of an arrow symbol, which is shown on a screen. Within this approach patients move an object on the screen upwards or downwards, which corresponds to up- or down-regulation of related brain activity. The simultaneous real-time feedback
enables self-regulation of the respective brain activity. For
the present investigation a THERA PRAX® neurofeedback system (NeuroConn, Ilmenau, Germany) was used,
which uses slow cortical potentials (SCP) that correspond
to very low frequent brain activity (EEG) at the CZ electrode position (intersection of the lines between nasion and
inion and between the ears, as indicated in Fig. 1). The
electrode at this position needs to be placed accurately, and
therefore this position needs to be determined at each particular session. One problem related to neurofeedback
training is that the patient can also manipulate the signal,
such as by moving the eyes or contracting the muscles surrounding the eyes. Therefore, four additional EOG (electrooculogram) electrodes need to be placed around the
eyes as illustrated in Fig. 1. Moreover, two electrodes need
to be positioned on the mastoids behind the ears, which
serve as reference electrodes. Annular Ag/AgCl-electrodes
can be used at all positions, some attached with a sticky

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4197

adapter ring, others just taped to the skin. For these electrodes the skin needs to be prepared, and electrode gel
needs to be applied to each electrode to reduce contact resistance. When all electrodes are attached to the patient, an
impedance check, a calibration of the eye movements and
an adjustment of specific training settings need to be performed, which afford time and considerable expertise. Besides, relatively many sessions (at leats up to 20 sessions
or more) are often necessary to reach a significant clinical
improvement with regard to ADHD symptoms. As a consequence, treatment can currently only be carried out in
specialized therapeutic environments.

S430

the electrodes used in these caps need to be attached to an
external amplifier [7, 8]. The Enobio headset poses an exception, as the amplifier is included in the neoprene cap
and the data is transferred via Bluetooth [9]. The reference
electrodes are not included in all systems and therefore
need to be attached to the skin separately.

CZ electrode position

Fig. 1 EEG and EOG electrode positions for Neurofeedback in ADHD therapy
It is the goal of this project to relocate the neurofeedback
treatment into the home environment, so that in the future
more patients can benefit from treatment, and that training
can be conducted more frequently in order to improve
symptoms more rapidly. The main challenges arising form
this particular relocation are
the preparation, correct placement and fixation of the
electrodes,
the calibration and adjustment of the software and
the removal and cleaning of the electrodes.
Therefore, a new positioning device to place the electrodes
at the predefined positions was needed, so that no special
knowledge is necessary for handling the electrodes.

1.2

EEG-Electrode Placement – State of
the Art

During the last decade different electrode positioning devices were developed, but none of the systems available
integrated all EOG electrodes needed for the outlined application in patients with ADHD. Available systems often
derive the relevant potential at the forehead, but not at the
temples or below the eyes. In general, existing positioning
devices can be classified into caps and headsets.
The textile caps are usually perforated at the standard international 10-20 EEG electrode positions, so that according to the application the needed amount of electrodes can
be attached. They are available with 23 up to 160 electrode
positions and in different sizes. The integration of the electrodes is realized by attached standard adapter rings or by
special electrodes provided by the company. The cables of

Fig. 2 Workflow of the home application
All headsets to position electrodes provide an integrated
amplifier to ensure mobility of the user, and which is usually attached either at the back of the head or above the
ears. The systems differ by the number, type and position
of the electrodes used with regard to the application they
were developed for. These applications range from diagnostic and therapeutic purposes as well as via product testing to computer gaming. Some systems use dry pin electrodes in different configurations, whilst others build on
wet sponge or capacitive electrodes. The carrier system
itself is designed individually:
It can be constructed like a helmet with capacitive electrodes raging from the forehead to back of the head (as
done in the system of the TU Braunschweig [10]).
A lamellar configuration with different types of dry
electrodes and similar electrode positions like the
aforementioned helmet can used (an example is the
headset of the company Cognionics [11]).
A headband with dry active electrodes at only eight positions can be applied (Imec-System [12]).

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4197

Flexible electrode arms, reaching from boxes above the
ears to the electrode positions, are used in the Mynd
system of NeuroFocus, which uses dry pin electrodes
from the forehead to the back of the head [13].
Similarly the EPOC headset of Emotiv is designed with
a flexible electrode arm. In this particular system wet
sponge electrodes at electrode positions ranging from
the forehead to the center of the head are used [14].
There have been evaluations of the quality of the EEG signal as obtained via of headsets, where the EPOC system
showed a significantly worse signal quality when compared to a clinical EEG [15, 16], but these findings might
be due to different electrode types and cannot be solely related to the design of the headset itself. None of the headsets available offers all needed EEG and EOG electrode
positions, and none of them was evaluated with regard to
reproducible positioning. Furhtermore, in all headsets at
least one degree of freedom is not constrained and can
therefore be modified between the sessions, thus resulting
in an incorrect placement of the headset.

2

Materials and Methods

Based on the application, an analysis of the current workflow and of existing headsets, specifications were determined and specific concepts were developed.

2.1

Specifications

The main function of the headset is the reproducible positioning and fixation of EEG and EOG electrodes, with the
CZ electrode affording the highest positioning accuracy
with an allowed maximum of about 5 mm deviation from
the correct position. All electrodes need permanent contact
to the skin during training; an actual contact pressure is not
required. Furthermore, the headset needs to be adapted to
the individual size and shape of the patient’s head. Unfortunately, not much anthropometric normative data exists
for children. The KiGGS study of the Robert-KochInstitute [17] and the publication of Spranger [18] only
provide data about the head circumference of children and
infants. As the KiGGS study is more up-to-date, this data
was used and the individualization range was set to 500560 mm head circumference. To reduce workload when
starting the training and to guarantee the mobility and
comfort of the system an amplifier and a rechargeable battery need to be integrated in the headset. Further requirements result from the use process of the system shown in
Fig. 2. A light weight, comfortable and robust system is
necessary to provide high usability. An easy handling, individualization, as well as an easy cleaning and exchange
of electrodes are also required to optimize the workflow.

2.2

S431

tion with a high amount of constrained degrees of freedom,
while still ensuring a high user acceptance.

2.2.1

Positioning

The translational degrees of freedom are constrained by
the headset consisting of two orthogonal plastic bands like
the ones used in bicycle helmets. Their length can be adjusted with a wheel at the back and on top of the head (not
shown in figure 3). The individual position of the electrodes is ensured by adjustable electrode arms, which can
be altered in one translational and one rotational degree of
freedom, indicated by blue arrows. The EOG electrode,
which is positioned below the eye of the patient is positioned with one additional translational and one additional
rotational degree of freedom, as it is located the farthest
from the headband. The electrode adapter, shown in red in
Fig. 3, is designed similar to the standard electrode adapter
ring, so that Ag/AgCl ring electrodes used for the first prototype can be easily attached and taken off the system.

2.2.2

Orientation

The rotational degrees of freedom in this configuration can
still be altered and thus can lead to severe deviations of the
electrodes from their correct position. Therefore, concepts
to reduce these degrees of freedom were devel-oped. An
individual nose piece like the ones used in glasses attached
to the horizontal band of the headset can be used to constrain the rotational degrees of freedom around the longitudinal and the transversal axis, but the sagittal axis is still
free. For children wearing glasses the nose piece can be
adapted to the individual geometry of the glasses. Similarly, an ear piece like an in-ear headphone or a tem-ple stem
of glasses will constrain longitudinal and sagittal rotations.
A combination of both will constrain all degrees of freedom. To ensure a better user acceptance and to in-crease
the comfort of the user, it seems possible to have enough
constraints by using a nose piece and placing the headset
in such a way that the headband touches the ears, and by
doing so constrains the sagittal rotation.

Conceptual Design

Many design concepts including glasses, masks, caps,
headsets and combinations of these were discussed during
the development process. The presented concept, as illustrated in Fig. 3, combines a high degree of individualiza-

Fig. 3 left:General design of the prototype, right: articvulated electrode arms

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4197

2.3

User Centered Concept Validation

A mockup was built to gain insight into the reproducibility
of the placement and the usability of the headset. Eight
subjects were asked to repetitively place the headset after it
was adapted to their head by trained staff. The mean age
of the subjects was 24,5 years (SD: 3,5 years) and the
mean head circumference was 55,3 cm (SD: 1,5 cm). Due
to the availability of subjects, for this preliminary pilot
study older subjects than the intended user group were
chosen, the head circumference was within the specified
range, but very small sizes were not included. Further pilot-ing with children is intended for the future. After each
placement of the headset subjects had to fill out a questionnaire, which included questions about wear comfort,
mental load, frustration and performance. Additionally, the
translational and rotational deviations as well as the time
needed for the placement of the headset were noted.

3

Results

Without using the nose piece in 12 of 21 overall test cycles
the headset was twisted around the longitudinal or transversal axis, whereas in 12 test cycles with the nose piece
only in one case rotation was detected, but in this particular case the preliminary nose piece did not fit properly.
This needs to be further investigated within a larger sample. In some cases it was difficult to place the headset due
to the hair style of the subjects. To target this problem for
the development of a new prototype bistable articulated
arms,which can be flipped upwards (when putting on or
taking off the headset, see Fig. 4) as well as a predefined
adjustment option of the wheels are planned. Furthermore,
some subjects complained about pressure points when
wearing the headset for a longer period of time. Therefore
a cushion will be integrated during future developments.
The general user acceptance was evaluated as positive and
with the nose piece all subjects felt confident in terms of
having properly placed the headset.

Fig. 4 Functional Prototype

4

Conclusion

A concept for the reproducible placement of EEG and
EOG electrodes for home application is presented in this
paper. The outlined preliminary user tests with a mockup

S433

show first and preliminary but promising results and
helped to refine the concept. The user tests need to be extended with a functional prototype (shown in figure 4) and
a larger group of subjects to ensure the reproducibility and
usability of the system. Moreover, the insufficient availability of anthropometric normative data for children presents a problem considering the variability and individualization of the headset. In order to address this it is planned
to record such data during the user tests to ensure that the
headset can actually be adapted to the geometry of children’s heads and faces. Furthermore, amplifier and battery
need to be integrated into the system, and other types electrodes need to be tested in this configuration.

5

References

[1] Bundesärztekammer: Stellungnahme zur Aufmerksamkeitsdefizit- / Hyperaktivitätsstörung (ADHS), 2006
[2] Schlack, R., Hölling, H., Kurth, B.-M., Huss, M.: Die Prävalenz der ADHS bei Kindern und Jugendlichen in Deutschland – Bundesgesundheitsbl - Gesundheitsforsch – Gesundheitsschutz, 2007
[3] Mandell, D. S., Thompson, W. W., Weintraub, E. S. et. al:
Trends in Diagnosis Rates for Autism and ADHD at Hospital Discharge, Psychiatric Services 2005
[4] Ludolph, Andrea G.: Behandlung der ADHS unter entwicklungs-(neuro)biologischen Aspekten: Was bedeutet das für
zukünftige Therapien?, 7. ADHS-Gipfel, 2012
[5] Gevensleben, H., Rothenberger, A., Moll, G.H., Heinrich,
H.: Neurofeedback in children with ADHD: validation and
challenges, Expert reviews, 2004
[6] Taylor, E., Dopfner, M., Sergeant, J. et al.: European clinical
guidelines for hyperkinetic disorder – first upgrade, Eur.
Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 13 (Suppl. 1), 2004
[7] Brainproducts: Easy Cap, EEG Recording Caps and Related
Products, 2012
[8] G-tec: Product Catalogue gGAMMAsys, 2014
[9] Enobio, Neuroelectrics Homepage, 2014
[10]Schilling, M.: EEG leicht gemacht – Elektroden-Helm ermöglicht schnelle und drahtlose Aufnahme der Gehirnsignale, Presseinformation der TU Braunschweig, 2014
[11]Cognionics Homepage: High Density Dry EEG Headset
System, 2014
[11]Imec: wireless low-power active-electrode EEG headset,
2012
[13]NeuroFocus Homepage: World's First Wireless Full-Brain
EEG Measurement Headset: Mynd™, 2014
[14]Emotiv Homepage: EPOC – High resolution multi-channel
portable EEG system, 2014
[15]Duvinage, M., Castermans, T., Dutoit, T. et. al.: A P300based Quantitative Comparison between the Emotiv Epoc
Headset and a Medical EEG Device, Inproceedings of Biomedical Engineering, 2012
[16]Stytsenko, K., Jablonskis, E., Prahm, C.: Evaluation of consumer EEG device Emotiv EPOC, CogSci Conference, 2011
[17]Neuhauser, H., Schienkiewitz, A.: Referenzperzentile für
anthropometrische Maßzahlen und Blutdruck aus der Studie
zur Gesundheit von Kindern und Jugendlichen in Deutschland (KiGGS) 2003 – 2006, Robert-Koch-Institut, 2011
[18]Spranger, J., Ochsenfarth, A., Kock, H.P., Henke, J., Anthropometrische Normdaten im Kindesalter, Zeitschrift für
Kinderheilkunde 103, 1-12, 1968

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4198

S433

Usability of low-power MEMS sensors for non-invasive pulse wave
measurement
1
1
2
1
D. Wohlrab , D. Tenholte , A. Müller , J. Mehner
1
Professur für Mikrosystem- und Gerätetechnik, Technische Universität Chemnitz, Chemnitz, Germany
2
Klinik für Innere Medizin I Kardiologie, Klinikum Chemnitz gGmbH, Chemnitz, Germany
Corresponding author: daniel.wohlrab@etit.tu-chemnitz.de
Structure:

1. Introduction / 2. Materials and Methods / 3. Results / 4. Conclusion / 5. Acknowledgements
6. References

Abstract
The non-invasive detection of pulse wave is one of the most important measurements in determination of vital
parameters, particularly in domestic environment. The currently used systems, such as chest straps or wired Holter
monitors are uncomfortable, restrict the patient in his freedom of movement and therefore are less suitable for long-term
measurements. In this study the applicability of various MEMS sensors for measuring pulse rate is investigated. In
principle the calculation of pulse rate is possible with a microphone, acceleration and pressure sensor. The most
promising setup for pulse wave measurements is the MEMS pressure sensor.

1

Introduction

Along with the demographic transition of the European
society to an ageing population [1] nursing care at home
becomes a steadily rising part of medical care because
most of the elderly people want to live autonomously in
their own fireside. Using additional supporting medical
technology to continuously monitor the patients vital signs
is the only way to react to the increased demand for ambulant personal. Apart from arterial blood pressure, respiratory rate and body temperature, the heart and pulse rate are
respectively the most interesting human vital parameters.
Non-invasive and continuous monitoring of the heart rate
is the current state of the art in clinical environment. There
are a lot of measurement systems with different function
principles which can be used to determine the actual heart
or pulse rate [2]. The most common and reliable system is
the electro cardio graph (ECG). The ECG can acquire the
electrical excitations of the cardiac muscles at the surface
of the skin by measuring the differences in electrical potential between two electrodes, which are attached to adequate locations at the skin [2]. One disadvantage of this
setup is the wired connection between electrodes and
measurement system, that restricts the freedom of movement especially in everyday life. Furthermore permanent
electrical conduction of the adhesive ECG-electrodes is not
guaranteed on sweating or wet skin.
Another measurement principle is based on the bloods absorption and diffusion of light depending on arterial blood
oxygen saturation – the photoplethismograph (PPG). With
a light source, for example a LED, the human tissue is illuminated while blood flows through. Simultaneously the
transmitted light intensity is measured with a photo diode
on the opposite side. So it is possible to acquire the arterial
blood flow over time and to extract the pulse rate by analysing the maxima of the resulting curve [3]. Most of the

PPG systems are fixed to the patient by a finger clip which
consequently is not weareable without movement restriction.
Neither the auscultatory nor the oscillometric common
cuff-based blood pressure measurement systems could be
used to perform continuous blood pressure measurements
and accordingly no continuously acquisition of the pulse
rate is possible [4]. A permanently inflated cuff, for example mounted at the upper arm, is reducing the blood perfusion of the extremities, which is not acceptable for a longterm measurement.
Most of the conventional clinical vital sign monitors are
stationary and heavy, so they are unsuitable for mobile applications and utilization in home care. In addition to the
named drawbacks the power consumption of all systems is
the main reason why miniaturized mobile measurement
equipment is not widespread and generally accepted. As
shown in [5] also LED-based PPG sensors have a current
consumption of more than 50 mA and relatively large batteries or accumulators are necessary to guarantee a long
operating time of these setups.
To encounter these problems, new sensor systems have to
be identified to realize a continuous non-invasive acquistion of the vital parameter pulse rate, which is the aim of
this work. Especially microelectromechanical systems
(MEMS) are predestinated to reduce power consumption
and dimensions of wearable medical devices. Furthermore
the mass production of MEMS sensors facilitates the reduction of sensor costs and directly decreases the costs of
the whole medical device.
In this work, different MEMS sensors have been tested at
well known palpation points for pulse rate measurement,
where it is possible to comfortably fix a wearable measurement system.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4198

2

Materials and Methods

2.1

Origin of human pulse wave

and sensor signals can be acquired. This reduces motion
artifacts introduced by muscular tremor.

During the ejection phase of the heart cycle, the blood volume stored in the left ventricle is pressed through the aorta
into the peripheral arteries by contraction of the heart. This
leads to an increasing arterial blood pressure. Due to their
elastic deformability, the arteries are enlarging their diameter because of the rising pressure and narrow back to
their original state when the blood pressure is decreasing
[2, 4]. The ejected blood volume is moving distal, that
means away from the heart towards the peripheral arteries.
Likewise the reversable expansion of the arteries is propagating distal. On the skin surface, the movement of the arteries can be palpated with the fingertips at special palpation points.

2.2

Measurement setup

2.2.1
Sensor positioning
In particular the described arterial movements can be palpated transdermal at every position where an artery can be
pushed against an underlying bone, for example at the carotid artery, the brachial artery and the groin artery. But
the most common position for pulse wave palpation is over
the radial artery near the wrist. The MEMS sensors are located at this position (see Fig. 1), because there the movements of the artery caused by pulse wave have high amplitudes. An additional advantage of this location is the possibility for future integration of the MEMS sensors into a
watchstrap of a smart watch or similar devices.

𝑔⃗

S434

1
2
3
4

𝒈⃗: earth’s  gravitational  field, 1: sensor with optional
adapter, 2: skin surface, 3: radial artery, 4: radius
Fig. 1. Part of the sectional representation of the wrist
with an attached MEMS sensor
Depending on the functional principle, the measurement
setup described in this work is similar to the arterial tonometry. There a tonometer is placed for example over the
radial artery to compress it until the blood vessel is flattened against a bone (e.g. the radius), but not occluded [2].
Each MEMS sensor is fixed by a hook-and-pile tape on the
wrist with a constant, slightly noticeable pressure to minimize motion generated signal artifacts and ensure comparable measurements. While putting down the forearm and
the back of the hand on a table, the muscles are relieved

2.2.2
Applied MEMS sensors and data acquisition
To perform continous pulse wave measurements three different MEMS sensors have been tested:
an 3-axis digital acceleration sensor,
a digital pressure sensor and
an analog microphone.
Their main parameters are summarized in Tab. 1.
Tab. 1. Measurement setup characteristics of used MEMS
sensors
sensor

BMI055

BMP085

ADMP411

measurand
output unit
supply voltage
maximum
supply current
sensor bandwidth
data rate

acceleration
g
3.3 V
130 µA

absolut pressure
Pa
3.3 V
1 mA

sound pressure
V
3.3 V
250 µA

250 Hz

200 Hz

28  Hz…20 kHz

500 samples/s

100 samples/s

5k samples/s

All sensors are separately soldered on individual doublelayer printed circuit boards (PCB) and configured as described in the specific data sheet. Each sensor is powered
by an external power supply with a supply voltage of
3.3 V. The advantage of all sensors are the dimensions
which are smaller than 5x5x1.2 mm³. Sectional representations of all sensor setups are shown in Fig. 2.
Acceleration
sensor

Pressure
sensor
1

Microphone
sensor
2
1

2
3
4
1: PCB, 2: MEMS sensor, 3: adapter, 4: recess
Fig. 2. MEMS sensors surface mounted on PCB in sectional representation, the bottom sides have contact to skin
2.2.2.1 MEMS acceleration sensor
The used MEMS acceleration sensor is the BMI055 from
Bosch Sensortech GmbH. The sensor is directly placed on
the palpation point with its topside and captures the vertical motions of the skin surface with its z-axis. This orientation in the   earth’s   gravitation   filed (equivalent to Fig. 1)
leads to a signal offset of -1 g which blanks the accelerations of the skin surface. The sensor measures in normal
mode with a bandwidth of 250 Hz and an output data rate
of 500 samples/s. The BMI055 converts an externaly applied acceleration into a proportional electrical voltage
which is anlog to digital converted by an internal application specific integrated circuit (ASIC). The sensor data is
transmitted over the SPI-3-wire communication interface
to a microcontroller which sends the data to a PC, using an

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4198

USB-connection. At the PC a LabVIEW-software collects
the measurement data, calculates the acceleration values in
the unit 1 g = 9.81 m/s² and visualizes the sensor signals.
2.2.2.2 MEMS pressure sensor
In contrary to the acceleration sensor, with the MEMS
pressure sensor BMP085 from Bosch Sensortech GmbH a
different principle is exploited. At the top side of the
BMP085 an adapter is additionally mounted which has a
recess that is forming a cavity of air as soon as the sensor
setup is attached to the skin surface. The pulse wave introduced skin movement compresses the encapsulated air
volume and leads to a rising pressure. Due to the acting air
pressure the sensor internal silicon membrane is bending.
Piezo-resistive elements attached on the membrane convert
these movements into a proportional electrical voltage.
Similarly to the BMI055 the ASIC of the sensor provides
digital output signals. A microcontroller reads the sensor
data over the I²C-Bus interface at an output data rate of
100 samples/s. The raw data is processed on a PC by a
LabVIEW-software and the pressure is calculated in Pa.
2.2.2.3 MEMS microphone sensor
The MEMS microphone ADMP411 from Analog Devices
Inc. is mounted on a PCB likewise the other sensors. The
ADMP411 has an input hole at the bottom side, where the
sound signals can penetrate. In consequence the PCB
needs a recess (see Fig. 2) where sound can pass through.
As described in section 2.2.2.2 the recess is forming an air
cavitiy by fixing the bottom side of the sensor setup to a
palpation point. In principle the microphone is working
like the pressure sensor, but here the sound pressure is
converted into a proportional electrical voltage. In difference to the other sensors, the bandwith of the ADMP411 is
optimized for the entire auditory domain and the analog
output sigal is recorded with an oszilloscope at a sample
rate of 5000 samples/s.

2.3

Characteristic signal parameters and
signal filtering

Appropriate signal parameters have to be used to adequately compare the sensors. Because of digital signal acquisition, all equations are given in time discrete form in the
following sections.
2.3.1
Offset
The Offset describes the output value of the sensor while
no input signal is applied. By calculating the mean value 𝑥̅
of the sensor signal output 𝑥 over 𝑛 samples, the offset
can be determined by
𝑥

= 𝑥̅ =

1
𝑛

𝑥   .

(1)

2.3.2
Root mean square value (RMS)
Another signal parameter is the root mean square value
, which is defined by
𝑥

𝑥

1
𝑛

=

S435

(2)

𝑥   .

2.3.3
Averaged peak-to-peak amplitude
The peak-to-peak amplitude 𝑃𝑃 of a pulse wave is calculated by the difference of the local maximum amplitude
and the local minimum amplitude 𝑥 . The aver𝑥
aged peak-to-peak amplitude 𝑃𝑃 can be computed by averaging of 𝑃𝑃 over 𝑘 identified pulse wave events:
𝑃𝑃 =

1
𝑘

𝑥

,

−𝑥

(3)

,

2.3.4
Signal-to-noise ratio
The proportion between signal power and noise power results into the signal-to-noise ratio, which describes the
quality of the desired signal and can be calculated by:
𝑆𝑁𝑅 =

𝑃
𝑃

= 20 ∙ 𝑙𝑔

𝑥
𝑥

,
,

(4)

2.3.5
Signal filtering
To separate the desired signal from disturbing noisy signals, filtering has to be done which increases the SNR. The
output signals of the used sensors are filtered by a digital
fourth-order butterworth bandpass filter with lower cut-off
frequency of 0.2 Hz and upper cut-off frequency of 20 Hz.
To reach a high comparability each   sensor’s unfiltered
output signal is normalised by subtraction of the associated
offset before filtering and plotting the data.

3

Results

The measurement results of all three sensors are presented
in Fig. 3. A comparision of unfiltered and filtered signals
is possible due to overlaying the sensor outputs in one
graph for each sensor separately. The clearly identifiable
peaks in the signals are representing the maximum artery
expansion introduced by the propagating pulse wave. In
Tab. 2 the characteristic signal parameters calculated for
the unfiltered signals are collected.
For the BMI055 an averaged peak-to-peak amplitude of
18.6 mg is measured by contemporary an output noise level of 2.8 mg. This leads to the lowest SNR = 1.4 of all
three measurement setups. With this sensor the analysis of
pulse rate is possible but difficult.
In contrast to the acceleration sensor, the pressure sensor
shows a very good extractable pulse rate, because it has the
largest SNR of 31.8 of all tested sensor setups. The upper
cut-off frequency of the applied bandpass filter suppresses
higher frequency components which leads to a time delay
in the filtered signal especially for sharp slopes with high
pressure amplitudes. The typical pulse wave shape with a
high peak maximum and a following smaller local maximum appears in the pressure signal.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4198

S437

The aquisition of the pulse rate is possible but not practicable with the MEMS acceleration sensor in everyday life,
because the acceleration amplitudes of slow hand movements exceed the maximum peak-to-peak amplitudes introduced by arterial movements, which makes the extraction of pulse wave peaks impossible.
Contrary to that, the pulse rate measurement with the
MEMS pressure sensor and the MEMS microphone are
more robust against body movements. Both sensor setups
have a high SNR, which could further be increased by additional filtering. With these two sensors the measurement
of the pulse rate is feasible at all palpation points, where
the pulse can be palpated with the finger tips, too.
A particular highlight is the possible acquisition of the
pulse wave shape with the pressure sensor.
Additional work has to be done in the optimisation of the
filtering algorithm to further increase the SNRs for reliable
pulse rate extraction.
Another challenge to be solved is the secure and continuous coupling of the MEMS sensor setups to the skin.
Moreover comparing measurements have to be done for
improved sensor setups to identify the most likely candidate for a robust pulse rate measurement system.
In future it should be possible to integrate one of the tested
MEMS sensor setups into a comfortable wearable smart
watch, which autonomously analyses the pulse rate and
sends the actual vital parameters to a remote device.
Accordingly the power consumption of a complete medical
device could be reduced by smart use of low-power radio
transmission techniques, e.g. Bluetooth Low Energy, and
by intelligent utilisation of sensor sleep modes.
Fig. 3. Comparision of filtered and unfiltered MEMS sensor signals
The output signal of the microphone is more noisy than
this of the pressure sensor, but less disturbed by unwanted
frequencies as the acceleration sensor output. The MEMS
microphone setup is presenting a high SNR of 20, which
leads to an easy extractable pulse rate.
Tab. 2. Measured and calculated characteristic signal parameters

4

sensor

BMI055

BMP085

ADMP411

signal offset
averaged peak-peak amplitude (PP)
output noise (RMS)
signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR)
extraction of pulse rate

-1 g
18.6 mg

99023.2 Pa
570.5 Pa

0V
734 mV

2.8 mg
1.4

3.9 Pa
31.8

10 mV
20

possible

very good

good

Conclusions

In general a continuously non-invasive pulse rate measurement is possible with all tested MEMS sensors. All sensors were fixed to the skin with only a slightly noticeable
pressure in the area of the palpation point, which is an advantage over cuff-based pulse measurement systems.

5

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by
the European Social Fund.

6

References

[1] Bundeszentrale für poitische Bildung: Altersstruktur
und Bevölkerungsentwicklung. Online: http://www.
bpb.de/nachschlagen/zahlen-und-fakten/europa/70503/
altersstruktur [14.03.2014], 2011
[2] Elter, P.: Methoden und Systeme zur nichtinvasiven,
kontinuierlichen und belastungsfreien Blutdruckmessung. Universität Karlsruhe, 2001
[3] Chung et al.: Non-invasive continuous blood pressure
monitoring: a review of current applicaions. Frontiers
of Medicine, SP Higher Education Press, 2013, 7,
91-101
[4] Solà i Carós, J. M.: Continuous non invasive blood
pressure estimation. ETH Zürich, 2011
[5] Sonoda et al.: Wearable Photoplethysmographic Sensor System with PSoC Microcontroller. Emerging
Trends in Engineering and Technology (ICETET),
2012 Fifth International Conference on, 2012, 61-65

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4199

S437

Development of a Fall Detection System and Comparison with
Commercial Systems for Home Care
Torben Bastert1, Frank Künemund, Christof Röhrig
Intelligent Mobile Systems Lab, University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Dortmund, Germany
1
Torben.Bastert@FH-Dortmund.de

Abstract
Falls are a common cause of injuries or fractures for the aged population. To be able to respond quickly and effectively
to such an event, it is necessary to recognize it early and to contact help. This is for the concerned person often not
possible and the nursing staff in inpatient and outpatient care is not the whole day on-site, so technical assistance systems
are required which can detect dangerous situations. Part of the Open iCare Assistant project is to develop a fall detection
system in order to detect dangerous situations and to be able to react to them. So that the results in terms of
commercially systems can be evaluated the Fallsensor and the ManDown Sensor of Bosch serve as reference system.

1

Introduction

Today, the average life expectancy of people in Germany
has risen to about 80 years1 [16]. Medical research and
technological innovation are just some of the reasons that
have contributed to the enhancement of quality of life and
thus to increase the life expectancy [5],[16]. However,
with the aging of a person new risks and changes occur.
Often elderly people are dependent on the assistance of
nursing staff, because more and more activities will be
difficult to them. In addition, through the loss of mobility
and the decline in cognitive abilities rises the risk that
older people get into dangerous situations from which they
can not escape by their own force [8]. One of these
dangerous situations may be a fall, as evidence by different
studies.
During a year-long study with 448 participants
over 65 years are 25.1 % of men and 37 % of women fell.
3.8 % of men and 10.9 % of women have fallen two or
more times within this period [14]. Another study says that
20% of all falls of older people need to be treated
medically and in 5-10% of falls even fractures occur [10].
According to estimate falls of older people within the
United States annually costs about 20 billion U.S. dollars
are caused [15]. According to a Finnish study, the fall of
an  elderly  person  costs  €  944  on  average [9].
However, when elderly people fall not only the
physical damage and impairments are considered. Also a
fall may result in psychological damage. Often those
people develop a phobia of falling, the so-called "post-fall
syndrome". Living with the fear to fall again by
movements and possibly again carries off bodily injury,
people often reduce their mobility. In fact, however, these
people isolate themselves more and more from the outside
world and become more prone to falls caused by the lack
of movement. [12]
Thus, the consequences of a fall are minimized, it
is important to be able to respond quickly and effectively
1

to dangerous situations. However, the lack of staff in the
nursing profession demands technical assistance systems
to take over parts of this area of responsibility [17]. For
this reason, the development of systems for fall detection
has become an increasing focus of current research in
recent years. For technical assistance systems it is possible
to detect such situations autonomously and react
appropriately. If a fall happens, the nursing staff could for
example be notified so that this assumes this situation and
initiate appropriate relief.
The Open iCare Assistant project deals with the
development of such an assistance system. The common
focus of the project is the development and research of an
intelligent and open infrastructure to support nursing
services in inpatient and outpatient care [7]. Part of this
research is to develop a fall detection system for people
living at home. As there are already many projects dealing
with this subject, from one of them an algorithm is selected
for fall detection and is tested within the Open iCare
Assistant project in various test cases. Based on the results
the fall detection is then integrated into the project. In
addition, the test cases are performed with commercial
systems to detect a fall to give a statement about the
reliability of the algorithm in comparison to the
commercial systems.
This paper is largely based on a study study
published in [1].

2

Materials and Methods

2.1

Commercial Systems

To get an overview of the possibilities for fall detection of
commercial systems two devices of the company Bosch
will be taken as reference systems. Firstly, the Fallsensor
[2], a system that is worn like a watch around the wrist, is
used (see Fig. 1 (A)), on the other hand the ManDown
Sensor (see Fig. 1 (B)) [3],[4]. This sensor can be worn,
for example, attached to a belt at the waist or hung around
the neck.

Current state: 2012

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4199

Figure 1 Commercial Systems: Bosch Fallsensor (A) and
Bosch ManDown Sensor (B), [1]

2.1.1

S438

ground and thus a possible fall. After the threshold has
been exceeded it will be checked for further 2 sec for
additional exceedance. To decide whether a fall has
occurred, the tilt angle of the sensor is calculated 1 sec
before the first threshold violation, and 2 seconds after the
last limit violation [11]. Does the angle and therefore the
position changed, the algorithm determines that a fall has
occurred. The algorithm is shown below in Figure 2.

Fallsensor

Detects the Fallsensor a significant impact followed by
immobility a vibration pre-alarm is triggered. If during the
vibration no movement is determined, for example caused
by unconsciousness, the alarm is triggered. If within the
time window movement can be detected the pre-alarm is
cancelled. However, by pressing the emergency button, an
alarm can also be triggered manually. Through this
operation false alarms are avoided and the reliability is
increased. [2]

2.1.2

ManDown Sensor

In contrast, the ManDown Sensor works different. If it
detects an inclination of more than 60 degrees an internal
timer will be started. If the sensor is brought back into a
vertical position within 10 seconds, the timer will be reset.
Remains the sensor in this position for 10 seconds a 30
second pre-alarm is starting. During this time an acoustic
signal sounds. During the pre-alarm the sensor can still be
placed in an upright position, so that the alarm is
cancelled. If the sensor is not placed in an upright position,
the alarm signal will be triggered. [3],[4]

2.2

System Design

As a first prototype for recording measurement values, a
STM32 Primer 2 of the company Raisonance is used [13].
This includes a 32-bit microcontroller with 72 MHz of the
company STMicroelectronics. In addition, the primer has
64K RAM and a built-in 3-axis acceleration sensor, also
the company STMicroelectronics [18]. With help of the
sensor, it is possible to detect falls. The accelerometer can
measure accelerations in a range of ± 2 g or ± 6 g with a
resolution of 12 bits or 16 bits. For the simulated test cases
here, the range of ± 6 g and a resolution of 16 bits was
chosen. The sampling rate of the measurements is set to
100 Hz. The test data will be measured with this unit and
stored on a SD card for an offlineanalysis. The system is
mounted next to the body center of gravity on the belt of
the test subjects.

2.3

Figure 2 Fall detection algorithm according to [6]

2.4

Test Subjects and Scenarios

Within the Open iCare Assistant project different test
scenarios for ADLs like walking and falls like fall
forwards were performed by three subjects. Additionally a
fall out of the movement was simulated. Each test person
repeated every activity and every fall three times. Among
the subjects were two females and one male. The average
age of the subjects was 28 years at the time of testing. All
persons have the primer and the ManDown sensor attached
to the belt. The drop sensor was attached to the left wrist.

3

Results

3.1

ADL-Scenarios

A total of five different activities of daily living were
simulated. A section of the measured values is shown in
Figure 3.

Fall Detection Algorithm

To detect falls based on accelerations the algorithm
according to Chen et al. [6] is utilized. For this purpose,
the linear acceleration is calculated first. In several test
cases according to [6] could be determined the acceleration
for activities of daily living (ADL) is below 3 g and do not
exceed this value. So when an exceed of this value can be
detected, this is an indication of a possible impact on the

Figure 3 Measured acceleration for the ADLs walking,
walking stairs, sit down, lay down, stand up and jumping
[1]

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4199

There, walking, walking stairs, sit down / stand up, lay
down / stand up and jumping is mapped. As seen in Table
1 the average acceleration for normal activities was below
the limit of 3 g. However, jumping lies with more than 6 g
clearly above the limit.

S439

These include the fall forward, backward, left side, right
side, the vertical collapsing and a fall out of the movement.

Table 2 Results of the various systems for the falls [1]
Table 1 Results of the various systems for ADLs [1]
The algorithm according to Chen et al. has detected a false
positive alarm in one of the nine conducted jumping
scenarios. In all other activities no false positives were
detected by the algorithm. The Fallsensor of Bosch has
detected in neither of the activities an alarm, while the
ManDown sensor has interpreted due to its operation, all
test scenarios of lying down as an alarm and issued a false
positive. The results in the error rate for the ADLs are
shown in Figure 4.

As can be seen in Table 2, all falls significantly exceed the
limit of 3 g and by the subsequent change of position, the
algorithm can detect all falls. The same applies to the
ManDown Sensor. Due to the change of tilt angle, it is able
to recognize all simulated test cases. However, the
Fallsensor has problems with the falls to the left and right
side, and the vertical collapsing. Reason for this might be
too weak impacts with the left arm on the floor. Also a
possible move following the fall would be conceivable,
whereby the possible alarm is already stopped early. Thus,
for the crashes, the error rate is shown in Figure 6.

Figure 4 Error rate of the various systems in the different
ADLs [1]

Figure 6 Error rate of the various systems in the different
falls [1]

3.2

The error rate for all test scenariosis shown in Figure 7.

Fall-Scenarios

In addition to the ADLs falls were simulated that should
be detected by the different systems. In Figure 5 Examples
of all performed falls are shown.

Figure 7 Error rate of the systems for all activities [1]

Figure 5 Measured acceleration for the falls forward,
backward, left, right, vertical and after walking [1]

The algorithm according to Chen et al. achieved in all test
cases, a reliability of 99 %. Both the Fallsensor and the
ManDown Sensor from Bosch respectively achieve an
accuracy of over 90 %. Considering the function principle
of the ManDown Sensor and not considering this test
scenario, the sensor did in all other scenarios the right

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4199

decision and has not triggered a false alarm. However, the
Fallsensor has some problems with the detection of falls.
Not every fall is perceived by the system but it could
identify correctly all of the normal activities to 100 %.

4

Conclusion

The focus of this work is the acquisition of test data and its
analysis and evaluation by a fall algorithm and commercial
reference systems. The background to this work is the
development and integration of a fall detection in the Open
iCare Assistant project. For this purpose activities of daily
living such as walking and different falls like the fall
forward are simulated by different test subjects.
Movements are recorded with an acceleration sensor and
stored for later analysis on an SD card. The recorded
measured values were then analyzed by the implemented
algorithm. Additionally the reference systems evaluated
the different movements, too. By evaluating the data it was
found that only slight differences in the results exist. The
algorithm according to Chen et al. reached a reliability of
about 98 % and the reference systems achieved in the test
scenarios a reliability of about 90 %. In the next step the
algorithm is implemented on a different hardware and
integrated into the overall system of the Open iCare
Assistant project. Subsequently, the test results can be
verified and checked with field tests in home care.

5

Acknowledgement

The   “Open   iCare   Assistant”   project   (005-1112-0011) is
funded by the NRW/EU-Ziel2-Programm EFRE
(Europäischer Fonds für regionale Entwicklung). The
authors would like to thank the Bosch company for
supporting the work with the reference system.

6

References

[1] Bastert, Torben: Evaluation von Sturzerkennungsalgorithmen im Vergleich zu kommerziellen Systemen Im   Rahmen   des   ”‘Open   iCare   Assistant”’- Projektes,
Fachhochschule Dortmund Fachbereich Informatik,
Forschungs- und Entwicklungsarbeit, June 2014
[2] Bosch Sicherheitssysteme GmbH: Bosch Datasheet:
Fallsensor. 5, July 2012
[3] Bosch Sicherheitssysteme GmbH: Bosch Datasheet:
Haus-ServiceRuf- Teilnehmerstation 62. 4, Dez 2012
[4] Bosch Sicherheitssysteme GmbH: Bosch Datasheet:
ManDown Sensor. 2, Sep 2012
[5] Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung: Lebenserwartung.URL: http://www.bpb.de/nachschlagen/zahlenund-fakten/soziale-situation-in-deutschland/61547/
lebenserwartung, accessed: June 2014
[6] Chen, J., Kwong K., Luk J. and Bajecsy R.: Wearable
Sensors for Reliable Fall Detection: Engineering in
Medicine and Biology 27th Annual Conference: September 2005

S441

[7] Fachhochschule Dortmund IMSL: Open iCare Assistant. http://www.fh-dortmund.de/de/fb/4/einrichtun
gen/laboratorien/imsl/Projekte/iCare/index.php, accessed: Apr 2014
[8] Flick, Simone: AAL Kompetenz: Bedarfs- und Akzeptanzanalyse
von
AAL-Lösungen.
URL:
http://www.aal-kompetenz.de/cms/index.php
/erfahrungsberichte/studienergebnisse/89-bedarfs-undakzeptanzanalyse-von-aal-loesungen,, accessed: Apr
2014
[9] Hilbe, Johannes ; Schulc, Eva ; Linder, Barbara ;
Them, Christa: Potential des integrierten Bettenausstiegsalarm-Systems  ”‘Bucinator”’  zur  Sturzreduktion.
In: Tagungsband des 2. Deutschen AAL-Kongresses,
2009
[10] Kannus, Pekka ; Sievänen, Harri ; Palvanen, Mika ;
Järvinen, Teppo ; Parkkari, Jari: Prevention of falls
and consequent injuries in elderly people. In: Lancet;
366:1885-93, 2005
[11] Luczak, S. ; Oleksiuk, W. ; Bodnicki, M.: Sensing
Tilt With MEMS Accelerometers. In: Sensors Journal,
IEEE 6 (2006), Dec, Nr. 6, S. 1669–1675.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2006.881433. –DOI
10.1109/J-SEN.2006.881433. – ISSN 1530–437X
[12] Neuburger, J. ; Lammel, C. ; Grünerbl, A. ; Brecht,
M. ; Grosse, V. ; Hager, K. ; Marschollek, M. ; Lukowicz, P.: Neue Möglichkeiten der Sturzrisikoerfassung. In: Tagungsband des 6. Deutschen AALKongresses, 2013
[13] Raisonance, STM32-Primer2 User Manual, 2010.
[14] Salvà,  Antoni  ;;  Bol´ıbar,  Ignasi  ;;  Pera,  Guillem  ;;  A-­
rias, César: Incidence and consequences of falls
among elderly people living in the community. In:
Med Clin (Barc) 122(5):172-6, 2004
[15] Stevens, J. A. ; Corso, P. S. ; Finkelstein, E. A. ; Miller, T. R.: The costs of fatal and non-fatal falls among
older adults. In: Injury Prevention, 2006, S. 290–295
[16] Statistisches Bundesamt: Lebenserwartung in
Deutschland.URL: https://www.destatis.de/DE/Zahlen
Fakten/GesellschaftStaat/Bevoelkerung/Sterbefaelle/
Tabellen/LebenserwartungDeutschland.html, accessed: Apr 2014
[17] Statistisches Bundesamt: Projektionen des Personalbedarfs und –angebots in Pflegeberufen bis 2025. In:
Wirtschaft und Statistik 11 (2010), 11, S. 990–1002
[18] STMicroelectronics, LIS3LV02DL, Rev 2, Jan
2008

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4200

S441

Open iCare Assistant – Requirements and Concept of an Intelligent
Infrastructure for Supporting Inpatient Care
Thomas Felderhoff, Daniel Bonney, Nicole Nennstiel, Michael Wulf
Institute for Information Technology
University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Dortmund, Germany
BioMedizinTechnik@fh-dortmund.de

Introduction
The inpatient and outpatient care sector is characterized by an extreme workload of the nursing staff. Technical assistant
systems may support the nursing stuff, but such systems will not substitute the important personal contact to the people
to be cared for.

Requirements and Methods
The requirements for an intelligent infrastructure system have been developed together with the end-user, the urban
nursing homes for the elderly in Bochum. For the benefit of the elderly people it primarily comes to make such technical supported observations to automatically send information of an emergency to the nursing stuff. From the everyday
work the major emergencies are:
detecting of a fall
localisation of the place of stay
leaving the nursing home
This information is useful to the nursing stuff especially during the night shift.

Results
Accelerometers allow a robust classification of a person’s position (standing, lying). Special signal processing and
computational effort are required to be able to infer from the acceleration data to the travelled path trajectories with adequate accuracy. Evaluation and data-fusion of different kinds of signals are aim leading. The same applies to fall detection. Especially, the falls of elderly people don’t have such significant changes in acceleration data as younger people.
Here the data-fusion increases the robustness of fall detection, too.

Conclusion
Using different sensors, it is possible that technical systems have a sufficient accurate image of the reality. The acceptance of such technical solutions will only be achieved if these solutions are aligned to the practical needs. Human,
e.g. that is the nursing staff as well as the person to be cared for, must have a perceptible benefit. And they may not see
any threat in the use of such a technique. These benefits can be demonstrated by several selected use-cases.

Acknowledgement
The “Open iCare Assistant” project (005-1112-0011) is funded by the NRW/EU-Ziel2-Program EFRE (Europäischer
Fonds für regionale Entwicklung).

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4201

S442

Open iCare Assistant – Open Intelligent Infrastructure for Supporting
Nursing Services in Home Care
Angela Lottis1, Frank Künemund2, Christian Weinbörner3, Christof Röhrig4
1234
Intelligent Mobile Systems Lab, University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Dortmund, Germany
1
Angela.Lottis@fh-dortmund.de

Abstract
Due to the demographical change, the outpatient and inpatient care of elderly people is becoming increasingly
important.   The   focus   of   the   field   of   research   “Ambient   Assisted   Living”   lies   on   technical assistant systems that are
supposed to allow the elderly to live more safely at home. A technical tool could be a wireless sensor network which
consists of mobile and stationary sensor nodes. It is used to collect data of the environment or detect a fall of the person
wearing a tag. In combination with the data transfer over the power line via powerline communication, the system can
be easily installed into existing homes. All data is gathered at the main unit which continuously analyses the current
situation using the obtained information. The main unit comprises the open platform universAAL.

1

Introduction

Nowadays people tend to live longer and get older. A great
number of older people have the desire to live
independently in their own homes for as long as possible.
With the aid of innovations in the area of research
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL), elderly people are
supposed to be able to live safely and independently in
their own home for a longer period of time, even if the
person is affected by a physical impairment. The health
and the physical functionality should be maintained, just as
the aspect of safety should be enhanced. [1]
An AAL system belongs to information systems. It
consists of various technical aids which are networked
with others. Components of such a system might be
devices for interaction (e. g. display, button), sensors (for
localisation of the person, vital parameters, parameters of
the environment) or actuator (e.g. for controlling lamps/
heating). The entire system as such should unobtrusively
be placed in the apartment and should not affect the
resident. Additionally, it should react according to the
given situation.
Through sensors it is possible to collect data regarding the
resident (health status, activity) and the state of the
environment. The present situation can be analysed by a
central control unit through the collected data.
Subsequently corresponding services will automatically be
provided. For example if the elderly gets up at night, the
system could self-actingly switch on the light to decrease
the risk of tripping. In case of a tumble, the intelligent
system should detect the tumble and thereupon inform a
reference person. If the person suffers from dementia, the
monitoring of a   person’s   activity can be helpful to notice
the progression of the illness.
An interoperability is nessecary so that devices of different
manufacturers can be incorporated to one single system.
Therefore an application-neutral software platform forms

the middleware. The middleware offers communication
interfaces for software components and forwards
procedure calls over the network. Via the network, the
different components can be connected with one another,
wire-bound and wireless. [2] [3]

2

Open iCare Assistant

The aim of the Open iCare Assitant 1 (iCare) project is to
develop an assistance system which raises the quality of
care and life of elderly people. The system should support
the different stages of assistance, from self-dependent
living in one’s own home to nursing services in inpatient
and outpatient care.
The project is divided into two parts. The paper at hand
concentrates on nursing services in home care whereas [4]
is concerned with supporting inpatient care.

2.1

System Architecture

Within the part for nursing services in home care, the
focus lies on the assistance of the nursing staff to improve
home care. Therefore devices for home automation and
fall detection [5] are being utilized. The home automation
should support the person being cared for by adapting the
living   environment   to   the   person’s   needs.   This   could   be  
for example a heating controller which automatically
regulates the room temperature. The fall detection
captures the movement of the person. In the case of a
tumble, the system should inform the nursing staff and/or
the relatives.
The system consists of serveral sensor nodes, a mobile
sensor node, a central server (so-called gateway), a tablet
and varoius devices for home automation. Figure 1 shows
the planned system architecture.

1

http://www.fh-dortmund.de/de/fb/4/einrichtungen/
laboratorien/imsl/Projekte/iCare/index.php

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4201

S443

the busses. The format of such a message correlates to the
Resource Description Framework. [8]
The Open Service Gateway initiative (OSGi) Alliance
developes speficifations for the OSGi service platform.
This service platform is a software platform that is based
on Java and it provides a dynamic modul system for Java.
[9] The OSGi technology is integrated into universAAL so
that components can dynamically be added and removed
while the complete system is running. [8]

Figure 1 System Architecture

To represent “knowledge”   and   to   have   a   joint   understanding of that knowledge, the concept of ontology can be
applied. In the universAAL project, ontologies are used to
distribute knowledge between applications and to share
functionalities. [10]

2.3
2.2

Gateway

The main component of the system architecture is the socalled gateway. This is where the different sensor data is
gathered and from where the device of the home
automation is controlled. The sensor data will be
processed and are supposed to be saved in a database. Via
a secure WLAN interface, a tablet can be connected to the
gateway to access data and execute functions.

2.2.1

For the safe@home project of the University of Applied
Sciences and Arts Dortmund [11], a prototypic sensor
node (Figure 2) has been developed.

universAAL

The middleware for the iCare project is provided by the
universAAL2 project and has been adapted to the specific
needs of this project. The objective of the universal project
is to develop a universal AAL platform which combines
the advantages and assets of several EU projects, among
others Amigo, GENESYS, OASIS, MPOWER,
SOPRANO and PERSONA. Interoperability and
standardisation are supposed to be realised so that
conditions are created to integrate as many AAL
applications and services as possible. Furthermore, the
development of individual AAL applications should be
made economically attractive. [6]
The communication infrastructure of the universAAL
platform is represented by the middleware. The core
component of this platform are the three busses: Context
Bus, Service Bus and UI Bus. All communication should
be handled by one of these busses, even if the applications
reside on the same device. [7]
The UI Bus is used for the communication between the
user and the system. Contextual information regarding the
user and the environment are transported via the Context
Bus. Messages between software components of the
platform are exchanged over the Service Bus. To swap
messages, the applications have to register themselves to
2

Sensor Node

Figure 2 Prototypic Sensor Node
The integrated sensor system comprises a temperature
sensor, a current sensor, a motion sensor and a light
sensor. As an interface to other technologies, a radio
module for EnOcean or for Bluetooth is integrated.
The basic concept for a sensor node is inherited for the
iCare project with the extension of a communication
interface for the electrical socket. This extension enables
the communication between several sensor nodes as well
as the gateway to exchange sensor data and commands.

2.3.1

Powerline Communication

The powerline communication (PLC) speficies a technology to transfer data over the electricity network. Its
main field of application is the home with the existing
electricity network (230 volt). Therefore the adapters
convert the incoming digital data into analog signals. The
analog signals are modelled to meet the frequency of the
electricity network. At any position in the electricity
network the signal can be tapped and converted back into
digital data.

http://universaal.org/index.php/en/

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4201

The technology PLC works transparently for the network
and does not change the data package. Consequently the
existing network does not recognize if the data is sent by
the PLC or the Ethernet. This simplifies an integration
into an existent infrastructure, given that there is no need
for changes of the network.

2.3.2

devolo

The devolo AG3 develops solutions for home and
professional applications with PLC. It is one of the project
partners in the iCare project. Within the iCare project, the
devolo dLAN® Green PHY Module (Figure 3) is used for
incorporating PLC. It supports the standard HomePlug
Green PHY. The module will be integrated into the sensor
nodes.

Figure 3 Green PHY Modul (devolo AG)

2.4

EnOcean

In the first instance, there will be two devices for home
automation within the iCare project. For one thing, a
heating controller regulates the heating and therefore the
room temperature. The desired temperature is supposed to
be set via the gateway. For another thing, a lamp can be
integrated via an adapter and thus be regulated by a
switch or the gateway.
The communication interface for the home automation
builds the technology EnOcean. It is a batteryless wireless
technology which enables the transmission of data
without any current supply. The technology rests upon the
principle of Energy Harvesting or uses solar cells to
generate enough energy to send short messages. Energy
Harvesting means the reclaiming of energy by for
example pressing a switch. Therefore a switch that is
without any electricity supply can be used to operate a
lamp via this wireless technology. [12] [13]

2.5

Bluetooth Low Energy

Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) is a wireless communication protocol which is energy-efficient [14]. It is part of
3

http://www.devolo.com/de/

S444

the Bluetooth standads 4.0 and operates within the
frequency range of 2.4 GHz [15]. It is supposed to be
used for the accessibility of telemedicine or devices for
telemonitoring. Devices that capture vital data (e.g.
weight, blood pressure) and enable the communication via
BLE will be embedded into the system of the iCare
project. Collecting vital data could be helpful to recognise
changes  of  a  person’s  health  status.  

3

Conclusion

Up to now, the commercially available AAL systems are
to a large extent self contained systems with no open
interfaces to other systems or devices. The system
developed within the iCare project enables the integration
of different end devices and services through open
interfaces. Thus the system can be adapted to the various
stages of needed assistance, from an independent living in
one’s own home, to outpatient care, up to inpatient care in
a nursing home.
The middleware for the iCare project is provided by the
universAAL project and has been adapted to the specific
needs of this project. universAAL represents supporting
software that combines various, heterogeneous technical
tools into a unified group, a so-called   “assistive  system”,  
and controls this distributed system. It uses a semantical
approach to describe a request by means of ontology.
Additionally, universAAL is based on the technology
OSGi which enables the system to add or remove
components during runtime.
Furthermore a powerline communication module will be
integrated into a sensor node so that it is able to
communicate with the main unit. Due to powerline
communication, it is possible to form a network without
the need to lay new Ethernet cables. Thus it is an
alternative for home applications.

4

Acknowledgement

The   “Open   iCare   Assistant”   project   (005-1112-0010) is
funded by the NRW/EU-Ziel2-Program EFRE
(Europäischer Fonds für regionale Entwicklung).

5

References

[1] Die Grundgedanken von AAL. http://www.aaldeutschland.de/aal-1/idee.html [Online: 23.09.2013]
[2] BMBF/VDE Innovationspartnerschaft AAL:
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) Komponenten,
Projekte, Services. Eine Bestandsaufnahme. VDE
Verlag GmbH Berlin Offenbach, 2011
[3] R. G. Heinze and G. Naegele: Intelligente Technik
und  “personal  health“  als  Wachstumsfaktoren  für  die  
Seniorenwirtschaft. In: U. Fachinger and K.-D.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

Biomed Tech 2014; 59 (s1) © 2014 by Walter de Gruyter • Berlin • Boston. DOI 10.1515/bmt-2014-4201

S446

Henke, editor: Der private Haushalt als
Gesundheitsstandort – Theoretische und empirische
Analysen. Europäische Schriften zu Staat und
Wirtschaft Band 31, page 109–134. Nomos
Verlagsgesellschaft Baden-Baden, 2010
[4] T. Felderhoff, D. Bonney, N. Nennstiel and M.
Wulf: Open iCare Assistant – Requirements and
Concept of an Intelligent Infrastructure for
Supporting Inpatient Care. In: Proceedings of the
48th Annual Conference of the German Society for
Biomedical Engineering (BMT2014). Hannover,
Germany, October 2014
[5] T. Bastert, F. Künemund and C. Röhrig:
Development of a Fall Detection System and
Comparison with Commercial Systems for Home
Care. In: Proceedings of the 48th Annual
Conference of the German Society for Biomedical
Engineering (BMT2014). Hannover, Germany,
October 2014
[6] S. Hanke and C. Mayer: universAAL – eine offene
und konsolidierte AAL-Plattform. In: Ambient
Assisted Living. 4. AAL-Kongress 2011.
[7] T. Dutz: support: RD Overview.
http://forge.universaal.org/wiki/support:RD_
Overview [Online: 10.07.2014].
[8] Dr. C. Hofmann: Eine Einführung in das
universAAL-Projekt. http://www.aalkompetenz.de/cms/index.php/plattformen/universaal
[Online: 10.07.2014].
[9] B. Weber, P. Baumgartner and W. Braun: OSGI für
Praktiker Prinzipien, Werkzeuge und praktische
Anleitungen auf dem Weg zur kleinen SOA. Carl
Hanser Verlag München, 2010.
[10] T. Dutz: support:RD Overview.
http://forge.universaal.org/wiki/support:RD_Overvie
w [Online: 10.07.2014].
[11] A. Lottis, D. Heß, T. Bastert and C. Röhrig
(2013): Safe@Home - A Wireless Assistance
System with Integrated IEEE 802.15.4a Localisation
Technology. In: Proceedings of the 7th IEEE
International Workshop on Intelligent Data
Acquisition and Advanced Computing Systems:
Technology and Applications (IDAACS'2013).
Berlin, Germany. September 2013., S. 461-467.
[12] EnOcean GmbH: Energy Harvesting.
http://www.enocean.com/en/energy-harvesting/
[Online: 08.07.2014]
[13] EnOcean GmbH: Energy Harvesting Wireless
Technology. http://www.enocean.com/en/energyharvesting-wireless/ [Online: 08.07.2014]
[14] K. Mikhaylov, N. Plevritakis and J. Tervonen:
Performance Analysis and Comparison of Bluetooth
Low Energy with IEEE 802.15.4 and SimpliciTI.
Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, 2013
[15] ITWissen: BLE (Bluetooth low energy).
http://www.itwissen.info/definition/lexikon/Bluetoot
h-LE-Bluetooth-low-energy.html
[Online: 14.07.2014]

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 7/28/18 10:21 AM

