Nonlinear Engineering 2014; 3(3): 163–168

Mohd Amzar Azizan, Mohammad Fard*, and Michael F. Azari

Characterization of the effects of vibration on
seated driver alertness
Abstract: Although performance of vehicle drivers under
fatigue conditions has been investigated in many types of
environments, there is insufficient research data about the
effects of vibration specifically on levels of mental alertness in seated drivers. In addition to the paucity of research in this area, the study of drowsiness caused by
whole body vibration is complex due to several confounding factors (such as lack of sleep, air temperature, health).
Hence, we investigated the relationship between whole
body vibration and driver drowsiness. A human vibration
test setup was designed for this study. Ten subjects were
exposed to low frequency sinusoidal and random whole
body vibration in multi-axial vibration at 0.3 m/s² (rms)
for 20 minutes. Changes in drowsiness during vibration
exposure were measured by recording electroencephalographic signals. Two brainwave spectrums (theta and beta
waves) were used for analysis. Exposure to whole body
vibration was found to be correlated with a reduction in
alertness. Reduction in beta wave and increase in theta
wave activity, caused by vibration, were found to be statistically significant. The data presented here quantify for the
first time the drowsiness caused by whole body vibration
and will help define the threshold limit for safe driving.
DOI 10.1515/nleng-2014-0015
Received April 9, 2014; accepted May 9, 2014.

1 Introduction
Driver fatigue is a significant cause of accidents on motorways or major roadways. The fatigue caused by driving for
extended periods acutely impairs driver alertness and performance and therefore can compromise transportation

Mohd Amzar Azizan: School of Aerospace, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Engineering, RMIT University, Australia, E-mail:
s3356158@student.rmit.edu.au
*Corresponding Author: Mohammad Fard: School of Aerospace,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, RMIT University, Australia, E-mail: mohammad.fard@rmit.edu.au
Michael F. Azari: School of Health Sciences and Health Innovations
Research Institute, RMIT University, Australia

safety. However fatigue caused by whole body vibration
is not well investigated or reported in the available literature. This is partly due to the fact that little quantitative
data exist on vibration and human biodynamic response
characteristics. Whole body vibration has been found to
correlate with a range of physiological reactions of the human body such as lower back pain and heart rate variability (HRV) [6, 7, 13]. Disturbance of vision and balance have
also been reported to occur during low frequency exposure [4]. In addition vibration may also affect muscle and
neurological functions, by acting as a stressor [2, 14, 16].
The automotive seat structure is exposed to vibration
from various sources such as vehicle powertrain and road
surface. Vibration transmitted to the human body contributes significantly towards human perception and ride
comfort quality [1, 8, 9]. Fundamental mode of automotive body which can transmit vibration to the seat structure occur at a frequency below 60 Hz [19]. However, fundamental resonance of human body occurs at frequency
below 15 Hz [5]. In the past, fatigue research was generally directed at what was deemed to be the most relevant
factor influencing driver fatigue – namely the length of
driving hours. For example, Australian legislated driving
hours for truck drivers are partly based upon the assumption that driving in excess of 12 hours may lead to fatiguerelated crashes. Regulations in other countries are generally based on the same assumption [10, 11].
Hence, there is considerable scope for defining the exact effects of vehicle, and particularly seat, vibration on
driver alertness. In addition, no particular attempt has yet
been made to specifically rank the contributors to driver
alertness in their order of importance. Drowsiness or lack
of alertness can be quantified in many ways. One of the
most and reliable methods is by measuring brainwave activity as detected by electroencephalography (EEG) [15].
EEG is widely accepted as a valid indicator of changes in
levels of alertness. EEG measures the electrical potential
of brainwave activity in the microvolt range by using electrodes placed on the scalp. The brainwave activities are
classified according to their rhythm and frequency spectrum, which are Beta (14 – 20 Hz), Alpha (7 – 14), Theta
(4 – 7) and Delta (0.5 – 4 Hz). Beta wave is associated with
state of alertness and wakefulness whereas theta wave is
associated with state of drowsiness. Moreover, Alpha wave

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 3/4/20 10:50 AM

164 | Mohd Amzar Azizan, Mohammad Fard, and Michael F. Azari, Characterization of the effects of vibration
is associated with the relaxed but conscious condition and
Delta wave is associated with deep sleep [17].
The experiment setup is purposely designed to investigate the relationship between whole body vibration and
drowsiness. The outcome from this investigation is believed to provide quantitative data with implications for
the effort to improve overall driving performance.

2 Methods
2.1 Subjects
Ten male university students with a mean age 23.0
± 1.3 years participated as volunteer subjects. They had
normal hearing and normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Each participant met all the inclusion criteria: no medical or psychiatric conditions or head injury, and not using
any medications or drugs. All participants refrained from
taking any medicine or caffeine before the experiment. An
informed written consent form was obtained from all the
participants after the procedure of the study was explained
and the laboratory facilities were introduced to them. The
procedures used were approved by the RMIT Human Research Ethics Committee (Approval number: EC00237).

2.2 Apparatus
Motion-based vibration simulator was developed for this
experiment (Figure 1). Cast aluminium platform table
was designed to has the resonant frequencies well above
200 Hz. This is to ensure that there is no external interaction of resonant frequencies. The platform table was
mounted on four air cushions that provided three degreeof-freedom movement. The excitation input for the platform table was provided by the hydraulic actuator that was

Fig. 2. Figure shows different electrode location on human scalp.
The location was divided into four sections which are frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital

placed at the corner of the table. The off-centre location
provides multi input vibrations to the table. An actual vehicle seat was chosen and mounted onto the brackets.

2.3 Experimental procedure
The experiment was performed during 9.00 am to 12.00
pm, the period of day associated with the peak in
circadian-based sleepiness. The room temperature and
noise level were kept at a level that was comfortable for
the subject. Informed consent was obtained prior to subject participation. The entire experiment lasted roughly 30
minutes with 20 minutes of vibration exposure. Subject
was asked to take a seat and assume a comfortable position with hands on the lap. Subject was instructed to
limit any physical movement and maintain straight and
level eyesight. Two vibration inputs (Gaussian random
and sweep sine) with the frequency range of 1 – 15 Hz were
used for the experiment. Vibration acceleration to human
body was kept constant at 0.3 m/s ² (rms). EEG electrodes
were carefully placed onto subjects scalp. Satisfactory contact between electrode and the scalp was indicated by the
green light (Figure 2) EEG signals were recorded two minutes before vibration, during vibration and two minutes after vibration.

Fig. 1. Figure shows motion based human vibration simulator that is
operated by electro-hydraulic actuator.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 3/4/20 10:50 AM

Mohd Amzar Azizan, Mohammad Fard, and Michael F. Azari, Characterization of the effects of vibration |

165

signals may also be corrupted by noise. The measured signals in the frequency domain can be written as

Fig. 3. Figure shows electrode placement on human scalp.

2.4 Signal recording
The electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded using 14channel electrodes attached to the EEG neuroheadset
(Emotiv EEG Technology), from positions Fp1, Fp2,F7, F3,
F4, F8, Fc5, Fc6, P7, T7, T8, P8, O1, and O2. EEG recording was based on referential recording and was referenced
to linked earlobes (P3 and P4). The placements of electrodes were followed 10 – 20 international standard guidelines [15]. For better accuracy, EEG signals were recorded
two minutes before and after vibration exposure (figure 3).
EEG signals were amplified and digitally low pass filtered
at 30 Hz with the sampling rate of 128. High pass filter was
introduced to remove the artefacts from pulse, muscle and
eyes movement.

X m (ωk) = X(ωk) + M(ωk)

(1)

Y m (ωk) = Y(ωk) + N(ωk)

(2)

where X m (ωk) are the measured Fourier spectra of the input and output signal at selected angular frequency ωk (k
= 1, . . . , F), respectively. The terms X (ωk) and Y (ωk) are
the true values of the input and output spectra, and M (ωk)
and N (ωk) are the noise on the spectra of the input and
output signal, respectively. It is proven in [17] that the noise
on the FFT coefficients tends to be uncorrelated and normally distributed with zero mean value when the number
of time samples increases. The frequency response function (nonparametric form of the transfer function) of the
system H (ωk), at angular frequencies ωk , can be derived
from experimental data, by using the cross-spectral density function method [18]
H(ωk) =

G xm ym (ωk)
G xm xm (ωk)

(3)

where G xm ym (ωk) is cross spectrum of the measured input
and the output at angular frequencies ωk , and G xm xm (ωk)
is auto spectrum of the measured input

3 Results
3.1 Theta θ wave

2.5 Data analysis
To investigate the influence of vibrations on human
drowsiness, EEG software called Emotiv Testbench (research edition SDK v.2) and EEGlab (version 9.B) software
were used. Raw data were converted into EDF format and
divided into ten seconds interval of epoch. The recorded
EEG was subsequently transformed from time into frequency domains by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) using a
5-s Hanning windowing function for power spectrum analysis. Scalp topography images were visualising via ICA (Independent Component Analysis). Data was subjected to
one-way ANOVA for statistical analysis using SPSS.

2.6 Signal processing
The Fourier spectra of the measured signals can be derived
from the time-domain data by the use of fast Fourier transform method (FFT). Since, the measured time-domain signals have contaminating noise, the Fourier spectra of the

The relative wavelet energy or event related spectral power
for the θ band (4 – 7 Hz) was calculated from the F3 and
F4 location. It has already been discussed in the literature
that, increase in θ wave activity can be associated with the
state of drowsiness. Figure 4 shows the wavelet energy for
two different input forces (random and sinusoidal). We observed an increase in value of θ wave relative wavelet energy at F3 and F4 location for random input force after vibration exposure. Results from sinusoidal input vibration
do not affect significantly (P-value > 0.01). The variation in
θ waves as shown in Figure 5 confirmed that there was a
prominent increase in θ waves after vibration, in comparison with that before vibration (P-value < 0.01).
Figure 6 shows an example of brain topography indicating theta activities for one of the subjects. Higher activity is indicated by the red-shaded areas whereas low activity is indicated by blue-shaded areas. Theta activity increased in frontal area after vibration exposure. This finding shows that, the person is drowsy even after 20-minutes
of vibration.

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 3/4/20 10:50 AM

166 | Mohd Amzar Azizan, Mohammad Fard, and Michael F. Azari, Characterization of the effects of vibration

Fig. 4. Figure shows significant increase for F3 and F4 locations during random input. However changes during sinusoidal input are not
significant.

crease in β activity shows that, the person is drowsy even
after 20-minutes of vibration.

4 Discussion

Fig. 5. Figure shows the activity power spectrum before and after
vibration. It clearly indicates an increase in theta activity after vibration exposure.

3.2 Beta β Wave
The relative wavelet energy or event related spectral power
for the β band (14 – 20 Hz) was also calculated from the
F3 and F4 location. β wave is associated with the wakeful
state of alertness, active or anxiety. Figure 7 shows a corresponding decrease in signal power of the β waves for both
input signal (random and sinusoidal) after vibration exposure. This provide evidence that subject is in drowsiness
state due to vibration. However, a decrease in sinusoidal
vibration is observed to be more pronounced compared to
random vibration.
The activity power spectrum graph in β waves as
shown in Figure 8 confirmed that there is a prominent decrease in β waves after vibration, in comparison with that
before vibration.
Figure 9 shows an example of brain topography indicating beta activities for one of the subjects. Higher activity
is indicated by the red-shaded areas whereas low activity
is indicated by blue-shaded areas. Beta activity decreased
in frontal area after vibration exposure. In contrast, a de-

Impaired alertness as a result of driver drowsiness has
been suggested as one of the primary causes of road accidents. However drowsiness caused by whole body vibration is not well investigated or understood. This paper attempts to fill the gap in the literature on human drowsiness
and whole body vibration, as defining drowsiness caused
by vibration is essential for decreasing fatigue- related accidents. The results obtained support the hypothesis that
low frequency vibration induces drowsiness and a reduction in alertness. The results shows the drowsiness effect
being less pronounced during random vibration compared
to sinusoidal vibration as measured by beta wave. The
harmonics characteristic and predictive signals of sinusoidal vibration can stimulate drowsiness faster compared
to random vibration. However, the effect of random vibration on drowsiness can only be seen in theta activity after
prolonged exposure to vibration. From this study, we can
conclude that, random vibration is time dependent signal
compared to sinusoidal vibration.
Human sensitivity and response to external vibration
are difficult to quantify due to non-linearity of the human body. The detection by the human body of different
forms of vibration are described in terms of discomfort or
unpleasantness. Therefore, using self-reported measures
such as level of discomfort may not be adequate in quantifying the effects of vibration in a reproducible manner.
Brain wave activity, as measured by EEG, however is a
standard and reliable indicator of alertness that can be
used for this purpose. Using EEG we demonstrate a reduc-

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 3/4/20 10:50 AM

Mohd Amzar Azizan, Mohammad Fard, and Michael F. Azari, Characterization of the effects of vibration |

Before vibration

167

After vibration

Fig. 6. Figure shows scalp topography images of theta activity before and after vibration. Higher activity was recorded at frontal area after
vibration.

Fig. 7. Figure shows event related spectral power for theta band in random and sinusoidal vibration. A decrease in beta wave during sinusoidal vibration are more pronounced compared to random vibration.

5 Conclusion

Fig. 8. Figure shows power spectrum density of beta wave before
and after vibration. It clearly shows a decrease in power after vibration exposure.

tion in beta waver activity and an increase in theta activity
after as little as 20 minutes exposure to vibration.

In this study, the biodynamic response of human body is
studied to quantify driver alertness caused by vibration.
For the ten subjects, the event related spectral power for F3
and F4 location showed statistically significant differences
before and after vibration. It was found that beta wave activity decreased in both random and sinusoidal. It indicates the reduction of brain wave activity when drowsiness
occurs. However, the effect in sinusoidal vibration was
more pronounced compared to random vibration. The increase of theta wave activity implies the reduction in wakefulness level. Although in sinusoidal vibration, it shows a
decrease but the results are not statistically significant.
Even though valuable data have been obtained in this
study, there are certain limitations. Seat dynamics characteristics (mode shapes and resonant frequencies) are not
investigated in this study. It is believed that the vibration
transmitted to human body may be influenced by the dy-

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 3/4/20 10:50 AM

168 | Mohd Amzar Azizan, Mohammad Fard, and Michael F. Azari, Characterization of the effects of vibration

Before vibration

After vibration

Fig. 9. Figure shows scalp topography images of beta activity before and after vibration. Reduction in wakefulness is indicated by the
changes of shaded area on frontal location.

namics behaviour of the seat. The seat poses certain vibration mode (lateral, fore-aft and twisting) which also can
have direct effects on human ride comfort quality. Furthermore, it would be instructive to correlate quantification of
driver drowsiness with driver performance. This objective
evaluation combined with the proposed biodynamic response of human body may constitute a prediction method
to improve the safety of driving as well as driver comfort.

References
[1]
[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]

[9]

Baik S., Lee J., Suh J. (2003), A study on the characteristics of
Vibration in Seat System.” SAE Paper 2003-01-1603
Berthoz A., Wisner (1972), A Striated and smooth muscle activity during low frequency vibration in Human Response to
Vibration Conference, University of Sheffield, 1972
Dussault C., Jouanin J-C., Guezennec C-Y. (2004), EEG and ECG
changes during selected flight sequences. Aviation, space,
and environmental medicine, 75(10):889–97
Griffin M.J. (1976), Subjective equivalence of sinusoidal and
random whole-body vibration, J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., 60, 1140–
1145
Griffin M.J. (1990), Handbook of human vibration. London:
Academic Press
Heide R., Seidel H. (1978) Folgen Langzeitiger beruflicher
Ganzkorper. Vibration exposition. Z. Ges. Hyg., 24:153–159
Helmkamp J.C., Talbott E.O., Marsh G.M. (1984), Whole Body
Vibration-a critical review. Amer. Ind. Hyg. Ass J., 45:162–167
Kim K.S., Kim J., Kim K.J., Dynamic modelling of seated human body based on measurements of apparent inertia matrix
for fore-and-aft/vertical/pitch motion. Journal of Sound and
Vibration, 330, 5716–5735
Kitazaki S., Griffin M.J. (1997), A modal analysis of whole-body
vertical vibration, using a finite element model of the human
body. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 200, 83–103

[10] Lisper H.O., Laurell H., Van Loon (1986), Relation between
time to falling asleep behind the wheel on a closed track and
changes in subsidiary reaction time during prolonged driving
on a motorway. Ergonomics, 29(3):445–453
[11] Mackie R.R., Miller J.C. (1978), Effects of hours of service, regularity of schedules and cargo loading on truck and bus driver
fatigue. US Department of Transport Report HS 803 799
[12] Donati P., Grosjean A., Mistrot P., Roure L. (1983), The subjective equivalence of sinusoidal and random whole-body
vibration in the sitting position (an experimental study using
the ‘floating reference vibration’ method), Ergonomics, 26,
251–273
[13] Tanaka M., Shigihara Y., Ishii A., et al. (2012), Effect of mental
fatigue on the central nervous system: an electroencephalography study. Behavioral and brain functions?: BBF., 8:48
[14] Wilder D.G., Woodworth B.B., Frymoyer J.W., Pope M.H. (1982),
Vibration and human spine. Spine, 7:243–254
[15] Zhao C., Zhao M., Liu J., Zheng C. (2012), Electroencephalogram and electrocardiograph assessment of mental fatigue in
a driving simulator. Accident; analysis and prevention; 45:83–
90
[16] Fard M.A., Tadashi Ishihara, Hikaru Inooka (2003), Transmission of the translational trunk vibration to the head-neck
complex, JSME international journal. Series C, Mechanical
systems, machine elements and manufacturing, 46(1):116–122
[17] Schoukens J., Renneboog J. (1986), Modelling the noise influence on the Fourier coefficients after a discrete Fourier transform, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement,
35(3):278–286
[18] Bendat J.S., Piersol A.G. (1980), Engineering applications of
correlation and spectral analysis, Johan Wiley & Sons
[19] Lo L., Fard M., Subic A., Jazar R. (2012), Structural dynamic
characterization of a vehicle seat coupled with human occupant. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 1–12

Unauthenticated
Download Date | 3/4/20 10:50 AM

