Poznań Studies in Contemporary Linguistics 52(2), 2016, pp. 209–233
© Faculty of English, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland
doi: 10.1515/psicl-2016-0008

COGNITIVE LOAD IN INTRALINGUAL
AND INTERLINGUAL RESPEAKING
– A PRELIMINARY STUDY
AGNIESZKA SZARKOWSKA
University of Warsaw
a.szarkowska@uw.edu.pl

KRZYSZTOF KREJTZ
University of Social Sciences and Humanities,
Warsaw

ŁUKASZ DUTKA
University of Warsaw

OLGA PILIPCZUK
University of Warsaw

ABSTRACT
In this paper we present preliminary results of the study on the cognitive load in intralingual and interlingual respeaking. We tested 57 subjects from three groups: interpreters,
translators and controls while respeaking 5-minute videos in two language combinations:
Polish to Polish (intralingual) and English to Polish (interlingual). Using two measures
of cognitive load: self-report and EEG (Emotiv), we found that in most cases cognitive
load was higher in interlingual respeaking. Self-reported mental effort that the participants had to expend to complete the respeaking tasks was lower in the group of interpreters, suggesting some parallels between interpreting and respeaking competences.
EEG measures showed significant differences between respeaking tasks and experimental groups in cognitive load over time.
KEYWORDS: Respeaking; interpreting; cognitive load; live subtitling; audiovisual translation.

1. Introduction1
Respeaking is a complex cognitive activity, requiring the coordination of multiple cognitive resources. When producing live subtitles for an audiovisual pro1

This work was funded by the National Science Centre Poland based on decision no. DEC2013/11/B/HS2/02762. Many thanks to all our participants for their time and patience during the
experiments.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

210

A. Szarkowska et al.

gramme, a respeaker must simultaneously listen to the original speech and translate the text – intra- or interlingually – as well as add appropriate punctuation
and edit the text if necessary.
In this paper we examine the cognitive load in a group of subjects while
they were respeaking two clips: intralingually (from Polish to Polish) and interlingually (from English to Polish). We hypothesise that because interlingual language transfer is a more complex activity, the cognitive load will be higher in
respeaking between different languages than within the same language. To test
this hypothesis, we compare two measurements of cognitive load: indirect (selfreport) and direct (EEG) as well as discuss the findings from the semi-structured
interview which followed the respeaking test.
We begin with a brief introduction to respeaking and respeaking landscape
in Poland, followed by a short description of the respeaking project, which this
study is part of, and then finally, we present the results on the cognitive load in
intra- and interlingual respeaking in the three groups of subjects.

2. Respeaking
Respeaking is a method of creating live subtitling with the use of speech recognition (SR) technology. It is “a technique in which a respeaker listens to the
original sound of a live programme or event and respeaks it, including punctuation marks and some specific features for the deaf and hard of hearing audience,
to a SR software, which turns the recognised utterances into subtitles displayed
on the screen with the shortest possible delay” (Romero Fresco 2011: 1). Respeaking has been used since 2001 (Lambourne 2006; Romero Fresco 2011) and
it is mainly employed as an intralingual tool, but it can also be used to translate
between languages (den Boer 2001).
Respeakers need to master both linguistic and technical competences (see
Arumí Ribas and Romero Fresco 2008; Eugeni 2008; Romero Fresco 2011).
The former include the ability to paraphrase and condense the text in one language or to translate the words spoken in a live programme into another language. Among technical competences are the knowledge of SR software and
subtitling skills. Other necessary skills are the ability to listen and speak at the
same time, as well as the ability to simultaneously listen to other speakers and to
one’s own voice in order to control the intonation and correctness of the respoken text.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

211

2.1. Respeaking in Poland
Slavic languages, as highly-inflected and non-positional, pose many challenges
to speech recognition (Ziółko and Ziółko 2011). This, along with commercial
considerations, influenced the fact that SR for Polish was developed much later
than for English, with two leading desktop systems Magic Scribe (offered by a
Polish company Unikkon Integral) and Newton Dictate (from Newton Technologies, a company based in the Czech Republic) becoming available in 2009 and
2014, respectively. As a result, respeaking made a delayed debut in Poland in
June 2013 at an accessibility conference at the Polish parliament. The canonization mass of popes John Paul II and John XXIII in Rome (April 2014) was the
first event with remote respeaking in Polish and it was also a turning point with
live subtitling in Polish made available online to a mass audience. In June 2015,
the conference presenting the EU Single Digital Market initiative in Warsaw
marked the first use of interlingual (English-Polish) respeaking.
At the end of 2015, as we write this paper, live subtitling for unscripted
broadcasts has not been implemented on Polish television, and respeaking is
mainly used as one part of all-in-one access service for live events, including
sign language interpreting, induction loop and live audio description, all available on the spot and online. Since the number of events with respeaking is still
relatively small, there are just a few respeakers working on the Polish market
and their work experience is rather limited.

2.2. Respeaking project
This study is part of a larger project on respeaker competences, whose goal is to
examine the process of intra- and interlingual respeaking as well as skills and
competences required in respeaking.
Due to the fact that there was no respeaking on Polish television and also no
professional respeakers at the time of this study, we could not test differences
between respeaking experts and novices. Instead, we tested three groups of participants:
(1) Interpreters and interpreting trainees, i.e. people with well-trained working
memory (see Chincotta and Underwood 1998, Yudes et al. 2012, Köpke and
Nespoulous 2006), having good linguistic and interpreting skills;
(2) Translators and translation trainees, i.e. people with good linguistic and
translation skills;

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

212

A. Szarkowska et al.

(3) Control group, i.e. people with good English skills, but no translation/interpreting background.
All participants underwent two days of respeaking training, conducted by professional respeaker trainers from the United Kingdom, Italy and Switzerland.
Apart from the main respeaking test, participants were also subjected to
working memory, paraphrasing, and proofreading tests. In this paper, we only
report the results from part of the main respeaking test related to cognitive load.

3. Cognitive load
Cognitive load is a “multidimentional construct representing the load that performing a particular task” imposes on a person’s cognitive system (Paas et al.
2003a: 64). The amount of load depends on the one hand on the person’s individual characteristics, such as expertise level, age, prior knowledge related to
the task, and on the other hand, on task characteristics, including the pace and
difficulty of the task, task novelty, etc.

3.1. Cognitive load in novices and experts
Cognitive load theory posits that the human cognitive architecture consists of
long-term memory, which is assumed to have “a virtually unlimited capacity”
(Brünken et al. 2003: 54), and working memory, which is limited both in capacity (Baddeley and Hitch 1974) and in duration (Peterson and Peterson 1959; Just
and Carpenter 1992; Šárka et al. 2015). Long-term memory contains hierarchically organised cognitive schemas “that are used to store and organize
knowledge by incorporating multiple elements of information into a single element” (Kirschner et al. 2011: 1). Working memory is responsible for the “mechanisms and processes that control, regulate and actively maintain task-relevant
information” (Miyake and Shah 1999 cited after Brünken et al. 2003: 54). If the
processing capacity of the working memory is low or approaches zero, then it is
likely that the person will experience high cognitive load or overload. The load
on working memory can be reduced by using automated schemas in long-term
memory (Kalyuga et al. 1999: 351; Paas et al. 2003a: 2). Schemas can “bypass
working memory during mental processing thereby circumventing the limitations of working memory” (Pass et al. 2003: 64).

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

213

According to Kalyuga et al. (2003, p. 24), the concept of schemas can be used to
explain differences between novices and experts. Because experts have many
hierarchically organised domain-specific schemas, they can more easily than
novices recognise patterns and categorise different elements into a single unit.
Unlike in novices, experts’ schemas are highly automated. This, in turns, reduces their load on working memory, gives more capacity for processing the task
and may positively impact their performance on a task.
While it is generally believed that expertise is domain-specific (see Ericsson
and Charness 1994), there is some evidence that experts may transfer their expertise to other tasks, that is apply the previously acquired knowledge to the
new task (see Kimball and Holyaok 2000). In other words, as noted by Muñoz
Martin (2014: 7), “expert skills may be successfully applied to non-identical
tasks”.

3.2. Cognitive load in intra- and interlingual respeaking
Thanks to a number of overlapping competences between interpreters and respeakers – including the ability to listen to the original speech and translate it into another language (or repeat it in the same language) while simultaneously
monitoring their linguistic output – in this study we wanted to find whether interpreters will be better predisposed to respeaking, as they had already developed some cognitive schemas necessary to perform such tasks. We set out with
an assumption that, having developed and automated some of the schemas useful in respeaking in their long term memory, interpreters will experience lower
cognitive load than the other two groups in both respeaking tasks (intra- and interlingual).
Another assumption we wanted to test was whether – given that the act of
transferring a text from one language into another is a more cognitively complex
activity – the interlingual respeaking task will trigger higher cognitive load than
the intralingual one.

3.3. Measuring cognitive load
Paas and van Merriënboer (1994) distinguish three measurable dimensions – or
“assessment factors” – of the cognitive load: mental load, mental effort and performance. Mental load can be thought of as “an indication of the expected cognitive capacity demands and can be considered an a priori estimate of the cogni-

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

214

A. Szarkowska et al.

tive load” (cited after Paas et al. 2003b: 64). Mental effort, in turn, is “an aspect
of cognitive load that refers to the cognitive capacity that is actually allocated to
accommodate the demands imposed by the task” (Paas et al. 2003b: 64). It can
therefore reflect the actual cognitive load. Finally, performance is an aspect of
the cognitive load that shows the person’s achievements in carrying out the task.
If the complexity of the task increases, people can compensate for an increase in
mental load by expending more mental effort to execute the task, keeping performance at the same level (Paas et al. 2003b: 67).
According to Choi and van Merriënboer (2014: 227), assessing the cognitive load based on mental load is task-centred, focussing on the characteristics
of the task, whereas the assessment based on mental effort is more humancentred, focussing on the mental resources expended by the person to deal with
the task. The assessment of the cognitive load based on performance relies on
the assumption that if people carry out the task faster and produce fewer errors,
then their cognitive load is smaller compared to those who make more errors
and take more time to complete the task.
In our respeaking study, given the higher complexity involved in translating
or interpreting a text from one language into another, we hypothesised that the
interlingual respeaking task will induce more mental load than the intralingual
one. In turn, the mental effort expended by respeakers will be larger in the case
of interlingual respeaking. We also thought that the mental effort will be higher
in the case of translators and controls, as they did not yet develop cognitive
schemas in their long term memory which would help them deal with such tasks
and which would reduce the potential strain on their working memory when respeaking. Because of their expertise, it is possible that interpreters already acquired schemas in their long-term memory which they can use in respeaking to
avoid overburdening their working memory, which in turn may result in a better
respeaking performance.2 This should potentially translate into lower cognitive
load.
Cognitive processes can be measured using subjective techniques, such as
rating scales, and objective physiological techniques, such as measures of brain
or heart activity (see also Brünken et. al. 2003). Rating scale techniques “are
based on the assumption that people are able to introspect on their cognitive
processes and to report the amount of mental effort expended” (Paas et al.
2003b: 66). As demonstrated by Paas on cognitive load (1992) and earlier by
Gopher and Braune (1984), people “are quite capable of giving a numerical in2

In this paper we do not yet look into performance measures, which will be reported elsewhere.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

215

dication of their perceived mental burden” (Paas et al. 2003b: 66). In this study
we used two types of measurement techniques: subjective rating scales and objective physiological technique (EEG), which we explain below.

3.3.1. Self-report
In the study reported here, participants had to assess their cognitive load after
each respeaking task using self-report rating scales. We used an adapted version
of the self-report questionnaire by Kruger et al. (2014), which was in turn derived from the NASA task load index (Hart and Lowell 1988). This scale for
measuring mental workload had also been successfully used to assess the level
of translation difficulty by Sun and Shreve (2014).
In our study, after each respeaking task, participants were asked to selfreport their cognitive load on 1–7 scale in five categories: difficulty level, temporal demand, mental demand, frustration, and engagement (see Table 1).

Table 1. Self-report questionnaire on cognitive load.

Parameter

Question after the respeaking
task

Rating scale

Difficulty level

How do you assess the general Very easy to very difficult
difficulty of the clip you just
(7-point scale)
respoke?

Temporal demand

How do you assess the pace of Very slow to very fast
the clip you just respoke?
(7-point scale)

Mental demand

How mentally demanding was Very undemanding
the task?
to very demanding
(7-point scale)

Frustration

Describe your level of
irritation, stress or frustration
while respeaking this clip.

Very low to very high
(7-point scale)

Engagement

To what extent could you
concentrate on the respeaking
task (without thinking about
other things)?

I couldn’t concentrate at all to I
was fully concentrated all the
time
(7-point scale)

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

216

A. Szarkowska et al.

3.3.2. Electroencephalography (EEG)
Another measure of cognitive load we used in this study was an objective physiological measure: EEG, a neuroimaging technique which detects electrical activity of the brain by using electrodes placed on the scalp. EEG makes it possible to “noninvasively measure brain activity in authentic, real-world settings”
(Antonenko et al. 2010: 428).
In the present study we used a low-cost EPOC Emotiv EEG headset which
detects brain activity. Based on special algorithms, the activity is “interpreted”
as different types of emotions: short term excitement, long term excitement, engagement/boredom, meditation and frustration. Each indicator is scored from 0
to 1; higher scores correspond to greater emotion intensity. The emotion indicators are defined as follows:
(1) Short term and long term excitement – a “feeling or awareness of physiological arousal in a positive sense” (Harrison 2013).
(2) Engagement/boredom – “the alertness experienced by a person and the conscious direction of attention towards a task-relevant stimulus” (Harrison
2013). Lower scores may indicate boredom.
(3) Meditation – a feeling of calmness and relaxation. “Meditation represents
how calm a person is: the higher the score, the calmer they are” (Harrison
2013).
(4) Frustration – a negative feeling of frustration. The higher the score, the
more frustrated the study participant is.

4. Method
In this paper, we report on the differences in cognitive load between the three
groups of participants in the two respeaking tasks: intra- and interlingual, using
two measures of cognitive load: self-report and EEG. We expect these two
measures to correlate.
We hypothesise that: (1) interlingual respeaking is more cognitively demanding than intralingual respeaking, and (2) interpreters will experience lower
cognitive load when respeaking both tasks owing to a number of similar competences required in interpreting and respeaking.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

217

Cognitive load in respeaking
4.1. Participants

Fifty-seven participants (50 women, 7 men) took part in the respeaking tests, out
of whom 23 were translators, 22 interpreters, and 12 controls with no interpreting/translation experience. The interpreters and translators had English as either
B or C language. The control group did not have any experience in either translation or interpreting, but spoke fluent English.
The mean age of the participants was 27.48 (SD 5.71), ranging from 19 to
51 years.
47 participants were graduates of linguistics/philology departments, 9 participants studied at other faculties, one did not have a university degree.
Based on the number of years of experience in interpreting and translation
(see Table 2), we divided interpreters and translators into two subgroups: experts (3 or more years of experience) and novices (less than 3 years of experience). Given that the development of expertise requires years of “deliberate
practice” (Ericsson et al. 1993) and “individual differences in attained levels of
performance are not fully understood” (Ericsson 2000: 187), we treat the notions of ‘experts’ and ‘novices’, following Shreve (2002: 161), as two extreme
poles of a continuum rather than two separate clear-cut groups.

Table 2. Work experience in interpreting and translation by group.
Experience
None

Interpreters and interp. trainees Translators and translation trainees
1 (9.09%)

1 (4.35%)

1–2 years

11 (50.00%)

8 (34.78%)

3–4 years

4 (18.18%)

9 (39.13%)

4 + years

6 (27.27%)

5 (21.74%)

4.2. Procedure
Participants were tested individually. They were first given a study information
sheet to read and were asked to sign an informed consent to take part in the
study. During the respeaking test, the participants’ cognitive activity was monitored with Emotiv EPOC headset. After fitting and calibrating the EPOC head-

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

218

A. Szarkowska et al.

set, participants had a short 3-minute training session with a mock intralingual
respeaking task (slow one-speaker speech) to familiarise themselves with the
experimental set-up. The test proper consisted of four randomised intralingual
tasks and one interlingual task. After respeaking each video, the participant had
to self-report the cognitive load for this task, by aswering the five questions
listed in Table 1.
Each participant used their own voice profile, which was created during the
respeaking workshops. We used speech recognition software for Polish manufactured by Newton Technologies. While respeaking, participants’ words were
transformed from speech to text by Newton, and they were displayed in FAB
Subtitler LIVE, professional software used in live subtitling on television. This
means that while respeaking, participants could simultaneously monitor their
output which was being displayed on the screen.
Participants were instructed to provide television respeaking intra- and interlingually, i.e. to repeat or translate the original speech, adding the necessary
punctuation marks. They were not asked to use colours for different speakers or
to mark speaker changes.
The participants’ output was audio recorded and later transcribed for further
analysis of respeaking performance (which will be reported elsewhere).
After the test, the participants underwent semi-structured interviews, in
which they were prompted to assess the difficulty of particular videos, to comment on the test, etc.

4.3. Materials
The respeaking test consisted of four 5-minute videos in intralingual Polish-toPolish respeaking and one 5-minute video with interlingual English-to-Polish
respeaking. The main focus was placed on intralingual respeaking, as it is this
type of respeaking that is most representative of market practices. There were
two variables in the intralingual respeaking task: speech rate (fast/slow) and
number of speakers (one/many). In this paper we only report the results from the
comparison of the slow, one-speaker task in intralingual respeaking and compare it to the slow, one-speaker interlingual respeaking task. We believe they
were relatively comparable in terms of the number of speakers, duration and the
number of words in the original text to be respoken (see Table 3).

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

219

Table 3. Characteristics of the respeaking tasks discussed in this paper.

Speech

Intralingual task
Prime Minister Ewa Kopacz’s
New Year ’s address
(2014/2015)

Speech rate
Duration
Number of words

108 words per minute
4 minutes 47 seconds
519

Interlingual task
Beginning of President Barack
Obama’s speech delivered on
4 June 2014 in Warsaw at the
25th Anniversary of Freedom
Day
94 words per minute
4 minutes 55 seconds
463

4.4. Study design. Dependent and independent variables
The final dataset for the statistical analyses consists of recordings measured during two experimental tasks: intralingual respeaking and interlingual respeaking.
The main dependent variables from self-report measures of cognitive load
were difficulty level, temporal demand, mental demand, frustration and engagement. All the self-report measures were evaluated on 7-points Likert-type
scale with high values indicating high level of frustration, effort, difficulty, etc.
For analyses of self-report data, 3 × 2 mixed design ANOVA was used, where
the experimental group was a between-subject factor and the task was a withinsubject factor.
The EEG variables were frustration, meditation, engagement, short and
long-term excitement (see section 3.3.2). All data from Emotiv EEG recordings
were carefully checked in terms of variance and missing data. EEG recordings
showing no variance or including missing values, which indicate measurement
problems or errors, were excluded from the analyses. For the sake of accurate
comparisons, only those participants were chosen who completed both experimental tasks (interlingual and intralingual). We need to note here that nine participants (one interpreter, four translators and four controls) refrained from taking part in the interlingual respeaking task. These steps reduced the initial sample, resulting in the final sample consisting of 3,175,229 data records from 30
participants (N = 13 in the translators group, N = 12 in the interpreters group,
and N = 5 in the control group). All analyses presented in the paper were based
on that sample.
The analyses were conducted with R programming language for statistical
computations (R Core Team, 2015). The basic analytical procedure for EEG da-

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

220

A. Szarkowska et al.

ta was mixed-design 3 × 2 × 10 Analyses of Variance (ANOVA) with the lme4
package, followed by pairwise comparisons with Tukey’s correction when needed. In all ANOVAs, the experimental group (translators vs. interpreters vs. controls) was treated as a between-subject factor, whereas both tasks (interlingual
vs. intralingual) and time intervals (10 levels) as within-subjects factors. The
time interval factor was calculated by dividing the task completion time for each
participant into 10 equal intervals.

5. Results
We first present the results of the self-reported cognitive load, then the EEG data and, finally, semi-structured interview held at the end of the respeaking test
between the researcher and the participant.

5.1. Self-reported measures of cognitive load
Difficulty. The analysis of variance on task difficulty revealed a significant main
effect of task, F(1,27) = 9.02, p < 0.01, eta-squared = 0.13. The interlingual task
was evaluated as more difficult (M = 3.43, SE = 0.29) than the intralingual one
(M = 2.2, SE = 0.29), see Figure 2. However, neither the main effect of group,
F(1,27) = 2.07, p > 0.1 nor the interaction effect, F(1,27) < 1, were statistically
significant. This indicates that none of the groups differed in how they perceived
the task difficulty.
Temporal demand. The two-way ANOVA with task temporal demand evaluation
showed a statistically significant main effect of the experimental task, F(1,27) =
11.05, p < 0.01, eta-squared = 0.16. The intralingual task was evaluated as faster
(M = 3.80, SE = 0.27) compared to interlingual (M = 2.53, SE = 0.27), see Figure 2. Neither the main effect of experimental group, F(1,27) < 1, nor the interaction effect, F(1,27) < 1, were statistically significant.
Mental demand. More interesting results were shown by ANOVA on the evaluation of mental demand. Similarly to the above statistical tests, we found the
main effect of task, F(1,27) = 15.04, p < 0.001, eta-squared = 0.21. Again, the
interlingual task was evaluated as more cognitively demanding (M = 5.76, SE =
0.26) compared to the intralingual task (M = 4.30, SE = 0.26), see Figure 2. The
analysis showed that the main effect of the experimental group was marginally

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

221

significant, F(1,27) = 2.59, p = 0.09, eta-squared = 0.09. Pairwise comparisons
with Tukey’s correction showed that interpreters reported lower cognitive effort
(M = 4.6, SE = 0.31) than translators (M = 5.48, SE = 0.30), t(27) = 2.27, p =
0.07 (see Figure 1). The mental effort reported by control group participants (M
= 5.01, SE = 0.36) was not significantly different from the effort reported by
translators and interpreters. ANOVA also showed that the interaction effect of
the experimental group and tasks was not significant, F(1,27) < 1.

Figure 1. Differences in self-reported mental demand in experimental groups
(error bars represent +/−1 standard error).

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

222

A. Szarkowska et al.

Frustration. In line with our predictions, the analysis of variance for selfreported frustration revealed a significant main effect of task, F(1,27) = 13.14, p
< 0.001, eta-squared = 0.15. The interlingual task triggered higher frustration
among study participants (M = 4.64, SE = 0.33) than the intralingual task (M =
3.08, SE = 0.33), see Figure 2. The main effect of the experimental group,
F(2,27) < 1, as well as the interaction effect, F(2,27) < 1, were statistically insignificant, which means that frustration was not higher or lower in any of the
groups.
Engagement. Contrary to predictions, the analysis of variance with self-reported
engagement as a dependent variable, showed no statistical differences between
experimental groups, F(2, 27) < 1, experimental tasks, F(1, 27) < 1, or the interaction between these two factors, F(2, 27) = 1.52, p > 0.1 (see also Figure 2).

Figure 2. Differences between experimental tasks on all self-reported measures
of cognitive load.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

223

5.2. EEG measurements of cognitive load
We start with reporting the EEG results where we found statistically significant
differences.
Frustration. The three-way ANOVA, 3(group) × 2(task) × 10(time), on frustration measured by Emotiv EEG showed a significant main effect of time, F(4.49,
121.31) = 7.43, p < 0.001, eta-squared = 0.09. The post-hoc analyses revealed
that frustration was significantly higher from 3rd to 9th time period compared to
the beginning and end of the task (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. Dynamics of Frustration measured with Emotiv EEG
in the respeaking tasks (error bars represent +/−1 standard error).

The main effect of task was marginally significant, F(1, 27) = 3.36, p = 0.08,
eta-squared = 0.02. The intralingual task triggered higher frustration (M = 0.55,

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

224

A. Szarkowska et al.

SE = 0.03) than the interlingual one (M = 0.48, SE = 0.03). Interestingly, the interaction of the experimental group and time was marginally significant, F(8.99,
121.31) = 1.70, p < 0.1, eta-squared = 0.04. Figure 3 presents the dynamics of
frustration during the respeaking tasks for the three experimental groups. The
highest frustration in the middle of tasks was measured in the control group. The
frustration among interpreters increased sharply from the beginning to the 6th
time period to similarly sharply drop after that time. Frustration among translators remained relatively stable during the whole task duration.

Figure 4. Dynamics of frustration measured with Emotiv EEG during both
respeaking tasks by experimental group (error bars represent +/−1 standard error).

All the other main and interaction effects in this analysis of variance were not
significant.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

225

Meditation. The second analyses of variance on Emotiv EEG data used Meditation as the dependent variable. The analysis also showed statistically significant
main effect of time, F(3.34, 90.2) = 2.93, p < 0.05, eta-squared = 0.02. The
pairwise comparisons revealed that during 6th, 7th, and 8th time periods participants were calmer than in the 2nd one.
Most interestingly the interaction of time, task and group was marginally
significant, F(9, 121.52) = 1.89, p = 0.06, eta-squared = 0.02. To understand the
three-way interaction, it was broken into two separate 3(group)x10(time) ANOVAS for each task separately. For the interlingual task, the interaction between
time and group was statistically significant, F(7.05, 95.24) = 2.37, p < 0.05, etasquared = 0.03 (see Figure 5a), whereas for the intralingual task, it was not significant, F(3.5, 94.39) = 1.33, p > 0.1 (see Figure 4b). Figure 4a as well as pairwise comparisons clearly show that when respeaking interlingually, the group of
translators experienced lowest calmness during the whole task duration. In contrast, during the intralingual respeaking task, experimental groups did not differ
on dynamics of Emotiv EEG Meditation indicator (see Figure 5b).

Figure 5a. Interaction of time and experimental group on the Meditation parameter
in the interlingual task (error bars represent +/−1 standard error).

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

226

A. Szarkowska et al.

Figure 5b. Interaction of time and experimental group on the Meditation parameter
in the intralingual task (error bars represent +/−1 standard error).

Further analyses of variance with Emotiv EEG measures were conducted on
Emotiv engagment. In line with the analysis of self-report engagment, we did
not obtain any – even marginally – statistically significant effect. The same lack
of significant results was obtained for analysis of Emotiv EEG long-term excitement as a dependent variable. For short-term excitement, the ANOVA revealed only main effect of time being marginally significant, F(3.85, 103.96) =
2.15, p = 0.08, eta-squared = 0.02. The effect can be evaluated as very weak
since it explains only 2% of the entire variance of short-term excitement.
Summing up the EEG results, higher frustration was experienced by all participants in the interlingual respeaking task compared to the intralingual task.
Frustration was highest in the middle part of the tasks. Participants from the
translators group experienced less calmness during the whole interlingual respeaking task, at the same time being steadily frustrated. Interpreters experienced high frustration in the middle of the tasks, however the high level of frustration lasted relatively briefly compared to the translators and the control

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

227

group. On the other hand, they also were relatively and steadily calm during the
whole duration of tasks. Lastly, no statistically significant effects were found for
short-term excitement and engagement measured with Emotiv EEG.
We did not find any statistically significant difference between experts and
novices in either self-report or EEG measures.

5.3. Semi-structured interview
When asked which clip they considered to be the most difficult, 37.5% participants stated during the semi-structured interview after the respeaking test that it
was the interlingual respeaking task. Only 7% said it was the intralingual clip.
Among the difficulties enumerated by the participants related to the interlingual
task were: finding the right Polish equivalent for some of the terms used by
President Obama in his speech (such as the Righteous Among the Nations, Velvet
Revolution, the Home Army) and comprehension problems (e.g. related to the
way President Obama pronounced some Polish terms, like Lech Wałęsa,
Stanisław Kostka, kiełbasa or Jan Karski). Some participants stated that although they considered the clip to be easy (slow pace of speech, familiar topic),
they still had problems with rendering it into another language and that it was
interpreting/translation that made it much more difficult to respeak, as they were
not used to such type of task.
As regards the intralingual respeaking task, some participants reported problems with respeaking long sentences and with following the pace of speech delivered by Prime Minister Kopacz. This may have stemmed from the fact that
although the speech was delivered orally, it was pre-scripted and read out from a
prompter, rather than delivered naturally.

6. Discussion
In this study, we wanted to find whether interlingual respeaking induces more
cognitive load than intralingual respeaking and whether the cognitive load is
lower in the interpreting group.
In the self-report questionnaire, we tested five parameters of cognitive load
(see Table 1). In three of them, we found significant differences between intraand interlingual respeaking: difficulty level, mental demand and frustration. The
difficulty level parameter is related to the notion of mental load (see Paas et al.
2003b) and may be regarded as an estimation of cognitive load required during

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

228

A. Szarkowska et al.

a task, resulting from the characteristics of the task. The interlingual task in our
study was considered by all participants to be more difficult than the intralingual
task (3.43 and 2.2, respectively, on the 1–7 scale). The mental demand parameter used in the self-report questionnaire can be taken to represent the mental effort required by participants to complete the task (see Paas et al. 2003b). It reflects the cognitive load participants had to expend when performing the tasks.
Similarly to the difficulty parameter, participants reported significantly higher
mental demand in the interlingual task. Not only did the participants think that
the interlingual task was more difficult than the intralingual task, but they also
declared to have had to invest more effort into respeaking interlingually, suggesting both higher mental load and mental effort in the interlingual respeaking
task.
Analyses of the self-report measures of the cognitive load showed that the
interlingual task was evaluated as more difficult, mentally demanding, and frustrating compared to the intralingual one across the three groups of participants.
These findings clearly indicate the potentially larger cognitive load during the
interlingual respeaking task which may be due to the fact that comprehending
the source text was more difficult when it was in a foreign language.
The interlingual task was evaluated as less demanding in terms of time
(speech rate) than the intralingual task. This difference may be related to the
higher speech rate in the intralingual clip (see Table 2). It points to a potentially
interesting finding that the pace of the task may be as important indicator of
cognitive load as the type of translation task (intralingual vs. interlingual).
One of the most important findings of this study is that although interpreters
did not differ from translators and controls in how they perceived the difficulty
of both tasks, they reported lowest mental demand. We believe this finding
shows that interpreters may have developed schemas in their long-term memory
relevant to this type of task, which helped them reduce the strain on their working memory involved in respeaking. It also points to the possibility that there
was a transfer of skills from interpreting to respeaking, particularly as regards
the ability to listen to the source text while simultaneously producing the target
text and monitoring their output. These findings now need to be correlated with
respeaking performance measures.
The self-report measures did not fully correspond with the EEG measures
when it comes to the cognitive load involved in intra- vs. interlingual respeaking. Despite higher self-report values for the interlingual task, the EEG data
showed higher frustration in the intralingual task. While we are not certain how
to interpret these results, we believe this may reflect the fact that while some
participants were trained in interpreting and/or translation between two different

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

229

languages, they were not accustomed to respeaking within the same language.
Being trained in linguistics and translation studies, participants may have also
intuitively allocated more difficulty to linguistic transfer between languages rather than within the same language. Another reason to explain this finding may
be related to the speech rate and the number of pauses in both clips. While in the
interlingual clip President Obama was delivering his speech at a very slow rate
(92 wpm) and was making frequent pauses, Prime Minister Kopacz in the intralingual clip was reading from a prompter and did not make many pauses,
which resulted in a slightly higher speech rate (107 wpm). The differences in
speech rates in both tasks were also noticed by participants in the self-report
questionnaire, as the intralingual task was rated higher in terms of temporal demand, although the difference between the two tasks did not reach statistical
significance (see Figure 2). All this may indicate that frustration levels correlate
with the pace of dialogue: the higher the speech rate, the higher the frustration
experienced by the participants.
As rightly pointed out by Antonenko et al. (2010: 427), “subjective rating
scales do not give insight into fluctuations in instantaneous load over time”. The
EEG data we collected allowed us to examine the dependent variables such as
Frustration and Meditation in the respeaking task in relation to time. The highest
Frustration values were detected in the middle of the tasks (periods 3 to 9 out of
10). This might suggest that the participants found it hard to follow the pace of
the original speaker and over time their ear-voice span became longer,3 which
resulted in an increased burden on their working memory and eventually cognitive overload. The sense of not being able to cope with the task triggered frustration.
Frustration levels, as measured by EEG, differed depending on the participant group. The highest levels were recorded in the control group, which may
be an indication of the highest cognitive load experienced by this group. This is
not surprising, as they did not have any background in interpreting/translation.
Importantly, interpreters’ Frustration dramatically dropped towards the end of
respeaking tasks, which can be an effect of their cognitive resources release. We
may expect that the interpreters developed cognitive strategies to deal with
highly cognitively demanding tasks like respeaking.
Frustration measures corresponded with the measure of calmness (Emotiv
EEG Meditation). The results show that translators experienced lowest calmness
while respeaking the interlingual clip, which may show that the interlingual task
was more frustrating for them as it required using other set of cognitive re3

We will report on the ear-voice span elsewhere.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

230

A. Szarkowska et al.

sources than they were accustomed to. Interpreters experienced significantly
calmer emotional state, probably being more confident of their abilities to complete the interlingual respeaking task accurately. Being more trained in performing parallel tasks such as simultaneous listening and transferring text between
languages, at the same time monitoring their linguistic output, interpreters may
have developed the schemas useful in respeaking, which may explain higher
calmness indicators in the case of this group and the interlingual task.

6.1. Limitations of the study
An important limitation of this study is that we did not examine whether the
length of the task affects the cognitive load and performance: since participants
had five clips to respeak, it would be interesting to see whether the measures
differed depending on fatigue, which possibly increased along with the duration
of the experiment.
Because of the limited number of participants in the study, we could not rely
on inferential statistics to examine detailed differences between expert interpreters and translators on the one hand, and novice interpreters and translators on
the other.

7. Conclusions
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study comparing cognitive load in
intra- and interlingual respeaking. Our findings show that interlingual respeaking was perceived by participants as more cognitively demanding than intralingual respeaking, as it is an activity more complex, possibly requiring more cognitive effort and expertise. Although we expected to find more prominent differences between interpreters and the other two groups across all categories of
cognitive load, the interpreters were indeed found to have experienced lower
cognitive load in some categories, particularly in self-reported mental demand.
The results also point to the importance of speech rate of the original clip fast pace of speech increases the cognitive effort necessary in respeaking, as
shown by our EEG results, where the faster intralingual clip was found to trigger more frustration than the slower interlingual clip.
Further studies on cognitive load in respeaking could look into differences
between professional respeakers and novices in other languages, countries, and

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

231

language combinations. It would also be interesting to test other types of clips
and genres.
We intend to further analyse the time intervals to examine what we term
“respeaking crisis points”, i.e. moments when respeakers’ performance was at
its lowest and where frustration was the highest. We are also planning to correlate cognitive load with respeaking performance quality.

REFERENCES
Antonenko, P., F. Paas, R. Grabnerand and T. van Gog. 2010. “Using electroencephalography to measure cognitive load”. Educational Psychology Review 22. 425–
438.
Arumí Ribas, M. and P. Romero Fresco. 2008. “A practical proposal for the training of
respeakers”. The Journal of Specialised Translation 10. 106–127.
Baddeley, A.D. and G. Hitch. 1974. “Working memory”. In: Bower, G.H. (ed.), The
psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory (vol. 8).
New York: Academic Press. 47–89.
Brünken, R., J. Plass and D. Leutner. 2003. “Direct measurement of cognitive load”.
Educational Psychologist 38(1). 53–61.
Boer, C. den. 2001. “Live interlingual subtitling”. In: Gambier, Y. and H. Gottlieb
(eds.), (Multi)media translation: Concepts, practices and research. Amsterdam/Philadelphia, Benjamins. 167–172.
Chincotta, D. and G. Underwood. 1998. “Simultaneous interpreters and the effect of
concurrent articulation on immediate memory. A bilingual digit span study”. Interpreting 3. 1–20.
Choi, H.-H., J.J.G Merriënboer and G.W.C. Paas. 2014. “Effects of the physical environment on cognitive load and learning: towards a new model of cognitive load”.
Eduational Psychology Review 26(2). 225–244.
Ericsson, K.A. 2000. “Expertise in interpreting: An expert-performance perspective.” Interpreting 5(2). 187–220.
Ericsson, K.A., R.T. Krampe and C. Tesch-Römer. 1993. “The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert performance”. Psychological Review 100. 363–406.
Eugeni, C. 2008. “A Sociolinguistic approach to real-time subtitling: Respeaking vs.
shadowing and simultaneous interpreting”. In: Cynthia, J., K. Bidoli and E. Ochse
(eds.), English in international deaf communication 72. Bern: Peter Lang. 357–382.
Gopher, D. and R. Braune. 1984. “On the psychophysics of workload: Why bother with
subjective measures?” Human Factors 26. 519–532.
Harrison, T. 2013. “The Emotiv mind: Investigating the accuracy of the Emotiv EPOC
in identifying emotions and its use in an Intelligent Tutoring System”. Technical report, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering University of
Canterbury.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

232

A. Szarkowska et al.

Hart, S.G. and L.E. Staveland. 1988. “Development of Nasa-Tlx (Task Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical research.” In: Hancock P.A. and N. Meshkati
(eds.), Human mental workload. Amsterdam: North-Holland. 139–183.
Just, M.A. and P.A. Carpenter. 1992. “A capacity theory of comprehension: Individual
differences in working memory”. Psychological Review 99(1). 122–149.
Kalyuga, S., P. Chandler and J. Sweller. 1999. “Managing split attention and redundancy in multimedia instruction”. Applied Cognitive Psychology 13. 351–371.
Kalyuga, S., P. Ayres, P. Chandler and J. Sweller. 2003. “The expertise reversal effect”.
Educational Psychologist 38(1). 23–31.
Kimball, D.R. and K.J. Holyoak. 2000. “Transfer and expertise”. In: Tulving, E. and
F.I.M. Craik (eds.), The Oxford handbook of memory. New York: Oxford University Press. 109–122.
Kirschner, F., L. Kesterand G. Corbalan. 2011. “Cognitive load theory and multimedia
learning, task characteristics, and learner engagement: The current state of the art”.
Computers in Human Behavior 27(1). 1–4.
Köpke, B. and J.-L. Nespoulous. 2006. “Working memory performance in expert and
novice interpreters”. Interpreting 8. 1–23.
Kruger, J., E. Hefer and G. Matthew. 2014. “Attention distribution and cognitive load in
a subtitled academic lecture: L1 vs. L2”. Journal of Eye Movement Research 7(5).
1–15.
Lambourne, A. 2006. “Subtitle respeaking. A new skill for a new age”. Intralinea.
<http://www.intralinea.it/specials_old/respeaking/eng_more.php?id=447_0_41_0_M>

Paas, F. and J.J.G. van Merriënboer. 1994. “Instructional control of cognitive load in the
training of complex cognitive tasks”. Educational Psychology Review 6. 51-71.
Paas, F., A. Renkl and J. Sweller. 2003a. “Cognitive load theory and instructional design: recent developments”. Educational Psychologist 38(1). 1–4.
Paas, F., J.E. Tuovinen and H. van Gerven Tabbers. 2003b. “Cognitive load measurement as a means to advance cognitive load theory”. Educational Psychologist 38(1).
63–71.
Peterson, L.R. and M.J. Peterson. 1959. “Short-term retention of individual verbal
items”. Journal of Experimental Psychology 58. 193–198.
R Core Team. 2015. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. Vienna. <https://www.R-project.org/>.
Romero Fresco, P. 2011. Subtitling through speech recognition: Respeaking. Manchester: St Jerome.
Shreve, Gregory M. 2002. “Knowing translation: cognitive and experiential aspects of
translation expertise from the perspective of expertise studies”. In: Riccardi, A.
(ed.), Translation studies: Perspectives on an emerging discipline. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. 150–171.
Sun, S. and M.G. Shreve. 2014. “Measuring translation difficulty. An empirical study”.
Target 26(1). 98–127.
Timarová, Š., I. Čeňková and R. Meylaerts. 2015. “Simultaneous interpreting and working memory capacity”. In: Ferreira, A. and J.W. Schwieter (eds.), Psycholinguistic
and cognitive inquiries into translation and interpreting. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
101–126.

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

Cognitive load in respeaking

233

Yudes, C., P. Macizo and T. Bajo. 2012. “Coordinating comprehension and production
in simultaneous interpreters: evidence from the articulatory suppression effect”. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 15. 329–339.
Ziółko, M. and B. Ziółko (2011). Przetwarzanie mowy [Speech processing]. Kraków:
Wydawnictwo AGH.
Address correspondence to:
Agnieszka Szarkowska
University of Warsaw
Institute of Applied Linguistics
Dobra 55
00-312 Warszawa
Poland
a.szarkowska@uw.edu.pl

Brought to you by | UCL - University College London
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/29/17 6:28 PM

