Investigating the Use of Brain-Computer Interaction to Facilitate
Creativity
D. A. Todd, P. J. McCullagh, M. D. Mulvenna, G. Lightbody
School of Computing and Mathematics, University of Ulster,
Shore Road, Newtownabbey, BT37 0QB, UK
Todd-D3@email.ulster.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
Brain Computer Interaction (BCI) has mainly been utilized for
communication and control, but it may also find application as a
channel for creative expression, as part of an entertainment
package. In this paper we provide an initial investigation on how
creativity can be supported and assessed. An art-based approach
was adopted to investigate the effects of achieving simple drawing
and painting. Subjects were asked to complete three tasks using an
Steady State Visual Evoked Potential BCI; a drawing task called
‘etch-a-sketch’ (TASK 1) which relied entirely upon BCI control,
and two painting tasks, the first (TASK 2) with a set goal and the
second (TASK 3) with more potential for user expression. The
tasks varied in the proportion of control to creativity required.
Participants provided feedback on their perception of the control
and creative aspects and their overall experience. The painting
application (TASK 3) for which users perceived that they had
more creativity was well accepted; 50% of the users preferred this
mode of interaction. The experimental approach described allows
for an initial assessment of the acceptance of BCI-mediated
artistic expression.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
J.4 Social and Behavioural Sciences.

General Terms
Experimentation.

Keywords
Brain computer interaction, brain painting, creativity, assessment.

1. INTRODUCTION
The idea of being able to exert control over a computer using only
the ‘power of thought’ has for many years been in the realm of
science fiction. However for over ten years, this concept has been
very much a scientific fact. Admittedly, this idea of BrainComputer Interaction (BCI) is far from commonplace, but it is a
technology that may be set to augment the human’s senses and
enhance the more accepted ways of interacting with the world;
both real and virtual.
Millán [30] claims that research in recent years has brought the
field of electroencephalography (EEG) based BCI “out of its
infancy and into a phase of relative maturity”. By contrast, Allison
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
AH '12, March 08 - 09 2012, Megève, France Copyright 2012 ACM
978-1-4503-1077-2/12/03...$10.00.

[1] reflects that current BCI systems are still “predominantly
inflexible, difficult to use, unreliable, and unavailable to nearly all
people who need them”. Recent technological progress means that
the truth is somewhere in between. Vaadia and Birbaumer [39]
report that, “the future looks demanding and promising at the
same time”. BCI may be a technology that is ready to be moved
out of the research lab and into the real world; for example, in
2010 Guger Technologies (g.tec) released the Intendix system
(www.intendix.com), a commercial BCI based spelling device.
An important step in the standardization of BCI research was the
creation of BCI2000 (Schalk [37]), which is a well-documented,
general-purpose BCI research and development platform
(www.bci2000.org). The system consists of four modules (EEG
capture, signal processing, user application and operator interface)
that communicate through a network-capable protocol stack
(communication is via standard UDP packets). This allows for
component based development, facilitating the integration of new
applications such as the brain drawing and painting applications,
which are the subject of this paper. Such applications can be used
to further promote inclusion [29], particularly for people who
have limited muscular control.
BCI continues to attract a high profile in the media. Particularly in
the entertainment and games sector, products are becoming
available with cost ranging from hundreds to thousands of dollars,
depending on functionality and intended application. For example:
• Starlab [38] released the four channel Enobio BCI/EEG system.
An Application Programmer Interface (API) has been provided
enabling the tool to be readily adopted by other research projects.
• Neurosky [33] produced products called Mindwave and Mindset
based on four channel EEG and eye blink signals. Neurosky also
work with leisure partners such as Mattel (Mindflex) to produce
BCI games, usually by supplying bespoke hardware chips.
Intended primarily for entertainment, the headsets cost a few
hundred dollars.
• Emotiv [14] produced the EPOC headset comprising 14 EEG
channels. Emotiv supply a Python toolkit for research purposes,
which facilitates development of software. The EPOC also
comprises two gyroscopes providing indication of head
movement.
• Interactive Mindball [23] provide BCI biofeedback products.
These can be viewed as demonstrators and are generally bought
for interactive displays at science museums, or leased for
corporate events as fun machines.
• Xwave provide an EEG head band and Android application for a
smart mobile phone for about $100. This provides ultimate
portability and should find diverse application, most probably for
gaming.
In addition, significant interest in BCI is fuelled by news items
such as:

• “World premiere of brain orchestra”, April 2009 [2], which
utilized P300 activity and g.tec equipment to generate BCI
mediated music.
• “Wheelchair 'reads minds' to move”, June 2009 [3] , in which
Japanese car maker Toyota claims to have come up with a
wheelchair that moves by reading people's minds.
• “The power of thought” Oct 2009, [4], in which scientists at the
University of Southampton have managed to communicate the
thoughts of one person to another across the internet without
either of them touching a keyboard or voicing any commands.
• “Brains take over from video game controllers”, July 2010 [5],
which used the Emotiv system for HCI video game interaction.
• “The robot that reads your mind to train itself”, Oct 2010 [6],
which reports on Neural Systems Laboratory, University of
Washington, hopes to take brain-computer interface (BCI)
technology to the next level by attempting to teach robots new
skills directly via brain signals.
• Real-life Jedi: Pushing the limits of mind control, Oct 2011 [7]
discusses the use of Emotiv headset for robotic control and other
applications.
These items provide an indication of public appetite for BCI in the
technology sector. Of course many of the above applications are
still embedded within research projects. However the release of
affordable hardware and Software Development Kits (SDKs)
means that BCIs are now starting to be used outside the traditional
BCI laboratories.
The European Union Framework Programme 7 funded several
research projects with the specific aim of making BCI technology
more accessible. BRAIN (BCIs with Rapid Automated Interfaces
for Non-experts) focused on the interface between the BCI and the
user [40]. BRAINABLE [11] combined BCI and Virtual Reality
Technology, with a focus on inclusion for disabled people. TOBI
(Tools for Brain-computer Interaction) aimed at finding practical
opportunities for BCIs to be effectively and efficiently used in
everyday life [27]. These show significant overlap in objectives.
Future-BNCI brought together BCI stakeholders (academics,
companies etc), through a process known as ‘clustering’, and has
provided an authoritative roadmap [17] addressing the state of the
art and mapping potential progress over the next five years. In this
roadmap, “Creative Explorations” is considered as part of
“Devices and Applications for Everyone”. The potential for BCI
devices to facilitate creativity has been addressed:
“The creative process allows humans to express their identity.
BCIs can be used in a unique way for creative expression. The
BCI can provide a direct link between the brain, from which
creativity sprouts, and a work of art.”
In this respect BCI levels the playing field between abled-bodied
and disabled users. Again quoting from the roadmap:
“BCI applications which allow self-expression are appealing to
both abled-bodied as well as disabled users. Moreover, users have
equal opportunities to create art which may build a bridge
between these groups. However, BCIs for creative expression are
just emerging and there are many opportunities to improve
interfaces and environments.
In the BRAIN project leisure applications were developed. A BCI
user was able to navigate to a media player, and select and play a
song, television program or film. Creativity may be viewed as a
logical further extension. In this paper we provide an initial
investigation on how basic creativity (in the form of simple
drawing) can be supported and assessed, by extending the BCI

technology to a drawing task (TASK 1) which relies entirely upon
BCI control, and two painting tasks, the first (TASK 2) with a set
goal and the second (TASK 3) with more potential for user
expression. Using the results as a guide, it is planned to extend the
functionality of the brain painting tool used and so investigate
creativity more fully.

2. BRAIN COMPUTER INTERACTION
The EEG reflects the electrical activity of the user’s brain and
provides information signals in the shape of distinct waveforms
that differ according to the user’s mental state. In a braincomputer interface, these brain signals are input to a signal
processing module which translates them into correspondingly
classes, mediated by the user. The classes may then be used to
actuate commands. Thus user-generated commands may be
passed to an application for enactment. In traditional BCI
applications, this may be for control of a motorized wheelchair,
identification of a letter for a speller application, or say control of
a media player for an entertainment application. Feedback is
provided in variety of ways (e.g., wheelchair movement, letters
appear on a computer screen, playing of a selected video) will
inform the user of the effectiveness (or otherwise) of the system in
enacting their commands.
BCI systems use different methods to extract the user’s intentions
from his/her brain activity. Researchers are investigating and
testing paradigms; primarily (i) measuring the brain’s activity
over the primary motor cortex that results from imagined limbs
and tongue movements, known as event related desynchronization and synchronization (ERD/S) [16], (ii) detecting
the presence of periodic EEG waveforms, called Steady State
Visual Evoked Potentials (SSVEPs) caused by external visual
stimulation [41], and (iii) identifying event-related potentials
(ERPs) in EEGs that follow an event noticed by the user (or
his/her intention)1, known as the P300 [9]. The Intendix system
mentioned above uses visual evoked EEG potentials (VEP/P300),
and exploits the P300 component, for classification.
So far, the application of BCI technology has focused mainly on
four areas: communication [10], smart home control [26, 13],
assistive technology [8, 15], and gaming [34, 35]. While the
majority of effort continues into expanding and developing BCI
methodology in the ways described above, increasing attention is
now being directed towards investigating creative aspects and
potential of BCI technology (e.g., [19, 21, 32, 36 ]) to provide a
creative channel, as a tool. This is our specific area of interest.
The aim is to investigate the potential of a BCI based system that
enables the user to be creative, purely through their brain activity.
The longer term goal is to develop a BCI that affords useful
therapy for very severely disabled people.
A working BCI drawing and painting system was realized by
enhancing an existing SSVEP based ‘BCI control system’. This
provided interactive user control. From a human computer
interaction (HCI) perspective the mental workload inherent in
addressing any particular problem shows that the total mental
workload has two components: one that is directly attributable to
the problem task itself; and one that is to do with whatever
interface is being used [20,22]. Thus a secondary aim was to build
an interface that is intuitive to use.

1

P300 is labeled as the positive deflection in the waveform
occurring 300ms after a ‘rare’ stimulus.

3. BCI AND CREATIVITY

4. METHODOLOGY

In the BCI roadmap, art appears alongside gaming under the
broader heading of entertainment. This reflects a special
relationship which merits closer examination.

A study was conducted to investigate the use of BCI for basic
creativity, and to focus on user perceptions. Two applications
were used.

Within creativity, considerable work has already been done
involving music-based BCI technology by Miranda [31] and
others [12, 25]. The application developed and tested for this
research addressed creativity expressed through art.

1. A drawing application based on the children’s toy ‘Etch-aSketch’, in which various simple shapes can be created by turning
knobs to control horizontal and vertical movement of the drawing
cursor. A BCI version of this drawing tool was developed.

George [19] developed a brain painting tool, which has been used
by both disabled people and established artists. It works by using
a P300-BCI based control matrix of painting functions. This
reflects the well accepted speller interaction, available with
BCI2000. Functions such as cursor control, shape and colour
selection may be utilized to produce images of an abstract nature.

2. A painting tool based on the system devised by McAleer (see
Fig 3 below). It enabled the drawing of 4 different basic shapes.
With guidance from the results of this study, the McAleer tool
will be extended and used as the basis for a further, more detailed,
study on creativity.
Eight subjects were recruited; 2 females and 6 males; ages ranged
from 21 to 51. EEG was recorded from 7 electrodes placed around
the occipital region, with an eighth ground electrode at the frontal
region. All these electrodes were attached via a cap and
conventional electrode gel. The electrode positions used were O1;
OZ; O2; POZ; P3; PZ; P4.
EEG signals were amplified, digitized, and analysed by Matlab
signal processing routines for extraction of pertinent information.
They were classified as demonstrating one of 4 features. BCI2000
translates this information into User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
packets, which in turn are passed to a painting application for
enactment (Figure 2). The BCI and painting package
communicate using an agreed protocol.

Figure 1. Interface matrix of the P300-brain Painting
application (Source: [32]).
The columns and rows of the matrix flash in random sequence;
the user focuses their attention on whichever function they wish to
select next. Whenever a row or column containing that function
flashes, the computer records a P300 deflection in the subject’s
brainwaves. After a series of flashes the computer can compute
the intended function and display it via the feedback mechanism.
For example, if the user focuses on column 2, row 2 (GR, to
change the drawing colour to green), the P300 will manifest
whenever either column 2 or row 2 flashes. This affords a creative
artistic image to be the output. Quantitatively, healthy subjects are
about 20% more ‘efficient’ in their use of this tool. Qualitatively,
both groups report strongly positive results.
When using the P300 BCI, the user was restricted to predefined
(discrete) step intervals when moving a cursor or changing the
size of objects on the canvas. This limitation was overcome by a
painting application that was controllable with a sensorimotor
rhythm (SMR) BCI based on the detection of rhythms during
motor imagery [21]. A hexagonal hierarchical menu enables
selection of the various painting functions needed. This theme of
degree (and ease) of control balanced against the freeform nature
of the image that can be drawn is central to BCI based creativity.
It is investigated further in our experimental work.
An alternative BCI approach was introduced by McAleer [28]
based on SSVEP visual stimuli. This requires the user to look
briefly at one of four LEDs flashing at a high stimulus frequency.
This stimulation can be detected in the users EEG and used to
enact a drawing command. It is explained further in the following
section.

Figure 2. Signal acquisition, processing and communication.
Each subject sat directly in front of a modified computer screen.
Above, below, and at either side of the computer screen were four
Light Emitting Diodes, which flashed at frequencies: 30Hz –
48Hz in 2Hz increments. The best 4 frequencies for each subject
was determined first by a calibration process [18], see Figure 3.
The stimulation frequencies in this range provide less noticeable
flashing and this is intended to increase user satisfaction.
Three tasks were completed by each subject. TASK 1 used the
“Etch-A-Sketch” tool for box drawing; TASKS 2 and 3 used the
“brain painting” tool for shape drawing on a screen canvas.
For TASK 1, the subject was asked to draw two square box
shapes; one large and one small.

The subject controlled the movement of the drawing cursor by
looking at the appropriate LED. Based on the recorded EEG
signals UDP packets were generated containing the identity of the
LED that the user had been focusing on. That is to say, four
different types of UDP packet could be generated, corresponding
to up, down, left, and right orientations. These packets were
passed to the Etch-a-Sketch drawing package which held them
temporarily in a queue, prior to processing each command
sequentially. The drawing application begins to draw the line in
the direction given by a command. The cursor continues to draw
the line in that direction, until a different direction is processed
from the queue.

involve sufficient user control for the user to feel full ownership
of the artefact created? And even, does the user feel pleased with
what they have created?
Afterwards, information was obtained from each subject about
their experience by asking them each to fill out a questionnaire,
see Table 1.

5. RESULTS
Sample qualitative outputs are shown for each task to provide an
indication of what can be created within the restricted control that
BCI can offer.

5.1 TASK 1 Etch-A-Sketch
The quality of output for this task varied, ranging from a nearexact drawing of what was requested, to some images that were
not recognizable as boxes at all. Most attempts fell between the
two extremes.

(a) Good completion: user able to control BCI

Figure 3. Experimental setup: viewing the LEDs produces an
SSVEP which is used to influence the applications.
In the Brain painting application the external LEDs were mapped
onto four shapes (circle, star, square, line). For TASK 2, the
subject was asked to draw one circle and two stars. For TASK 3,
free-response, the subject was asked to produce “a pleasing
image”.

(b) Unrecognizable: user unable to control BCI

These tasks were designed for balance between degree of control
and ease of use. In each case, the subjects were given a few
moments to familiarize themselves with the workings of the BCI
equipment used for each task. When they were ready to begin the
task itself, each one had a maximum of three minutes to complete
the task to their satisfaction.
In TASK1, drawing two boxes, the user controls the drawing
cursor and nothing can be drawn without their input. Even to draw
a simple straight line would require input from the user to begin
with, i.e. to set the drawing cursor moving in any particular
direction.
In contrast, the shape-drawing task, and the free response task
involve less user control. The crucial question is: do the tasks

(c) General standard showing some control
Figure 4. Sample attempts for TASK 1.

5.2 TASK 2 Shape Drawing
Five out of eight subjects were able to produce exactly what was
asked for in this task (i.e., one circle and two stars). Figure 5
shows sample output.

The three minutes per task was adequate for completion. Rigorous
timing was not used extensively as it might have made the
subjects anxious, thus reducing performance. Six participants
considered that the time allocated for each task was about right;
two thought TASK 1 was given too much time; one also felt the
same for TASK 2. Participants were asked: Would you want to do
more/less of each task? Five subjects responded to this question.
There was a 3:2 split in favor of doing more of TASK 1. All 5
wanted to do more of the other two tasks. By inference, the other
3 participants were probably unwilling to engage further with the
tasks.
Table 1 provides a quantitative analysis of the feedback from the
subjects on engagement and satisfaction. Mean values have been
computed as illustrated for question 1, TASK 1.

6. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Fig 5. Sample output for TASK 2 providing the requested one
circle and two stars.

5.3 TASK 3: free response painting
For free response painting, outputs differed, but their differences
are best described as “variations on a common theme”. This is the
task in which results across the subjects showed the most
similarities, in terms of the degree of success achieved. However,
conversely, it also allows for a degree of individual expression.
Feedback for this task show that it was well liked, and that
subjects felt a high degree of control over what they were doing.
This may appear to be an answer to issues concerning the pleasure
involved in creating something and the sense of ownership
thereof. However, caution is needed: sample size is small and
there was not complete 100% response.

To provide user control over image production means relying
completely on the efficiency of the BCI equipment used. This is
not practical as BCI technology is not yet mature enough for
100% reliability. A situation where the user has total control over
the image, as in the box-drawing task, is achievable, but it may
prove difficult and lead to high levels of user frustration as it
entails complete reliance on BCI equipment.
Hence some assistance is provided by the application. Rather than
drawing a line, the user initiates the direction and the application
continues until a new valid direction is received in a subsequent
packet. The alternative approach would have been to have the
cursor draw a set distance, and then wait for a command to either
continue drawing in that direction, or to start drawing in a new
direction. However, this approach was rejected, as initial testing
showed that it reduced the user experience, and increased the
user's frustration at using the software.
The BCI applications for painting can be enhanced. Control over
the color, size, or position of what is drawn is currently not
realised. A mixture of different colored shapes is the output,
dependent on SSVEP stimulation for classification, but
autonomous to the drawing package. An objective is to refine this
to provide a greater degree of user control over the image in terms
of shape, color, and position.

(a) free response painting – example 1

CENTRAL
HUB

(b) free response painting – example 2
Fig 6. Sample output for TASK 3.

4 OPTIONS

1

2

3

4

Fig 7. Hierarchical menu allowing additional control over
colour and placament.

As expected, most people found the first task the most difficult
and liked it least. Unusual was the fact that most people felt they
had a high degree of control in TASK 2 and TASK 3 although
they actually had limited control; they could only select the type
of shape drawn; color and position were randomly assigned, and
size was uniform. This positive bias towards TASK 3 becomes
more striking when the results for enjoyment of each task and the
order of preference for the tasks are considered. It seems that the
users found TASK 3 very rewarding because they could begin to
exercise their creativity, and this made the task a positive
experience. It was certainly the easiest task, and the one which
users generally found to be most rewarding. As mentioned earlier
this hints at an answer our main question from prior to the study,
relating to ownership of the artifact produced and liking it. Further
investigation with a much larger sample size is needed before any
meaningful conclusion can be drawn.
These results showed that, while it certainly is limited, the current
brain painting system could meet some people’s needs reasonably
well, facilitating user mediated drawing and possibly expression.
The addition of control over colour, could provide a direct insight
into mood - for example; with this attribute either selected or
inferred from a feature of the brain activity. The colour, size, and

approximate positioning of each individual shape can be user
controlled in a near-synchronous manner. For example, shape /
colour selection can be under the user’s control, by the addition of
a hierarchical menu structure. Figure 7 illustrates how a 4-way
optional layout, within a 2-level hierarchy could be used to
achieve this goal. The setup facilitates a choice of 4 colors (red,
green, blue, yellow), 4 shapes (triangle, circle, square, star), 4
orientations (top left, top right, bottom right, bottom left), and four
output choices (1=print shape, 2=draw new shape, 3=print image
[after this, a new image is created, by default], 4=exit.)
An interesting possibility is the development of a suitable hybrid
BCI for creativity. A hybrid BCI may be composed of two BCI
protocols, e.g. SSVEP and intended movement, or a BCI and
another system, e.g. an eye-tracker. Hybrid BCIs can either
process their inputs simultaneously, or operate two systems
sequentially, where the first system can act as a “brain switch”. A
hybrid BCI [24] may achieve goals better than a single system.
For example, a hybrid BCI might infer user intent more
accurately, improve the overall performance of the system, or
reduce the rate of false positives to enhance user acceptance.

Table 1: Questionnaire Results
Question

Response-type

Describe the degree of control that you felt
you had in each of the three tasks?
Mean for TASK 1 =
(0*0+3*1+1*2+4*3+0*4)/8
=2.125

TASK 1

TASK 2

TASK 3

0= NO CONTROL

0

0

0

1= A LITTLE CONTROL

3

0

1

2 = SOME CONTROL

1

3

1

3 = SIGNIFICANT CONTROL

4

4

3

4 = COMPLETE CONTROL

0

1

3

2.125

2.75

3.0

0 = VERY UNPLEASANT

0

0

0

1 = A LITTLE UNPLEASANT

1

0

0

2 = A LITTLE ENJOYABLE

1

3

2

3 = FAIRLY ENJOYABLE

5

4

3

4 = VERY ENJOYABLE

1

1

3

MEAN VALUES
How much did you enjoy each task?

MEAN VALUES
Put the tasks in order of preference?

2.75

2.75

3.125

0 = TOP

3

1

4

1 = MIDDLE

3

2

3

2 = BOTTOM
How difficult was it to use the BCI
equipment?

What sense of achievement did you get
from each task?

2

5

1

MEAN VALUES

2.125

0.5

1.375

0 = VERY HARD

0

0

1

1 = QUITE HARD

3

2

0

2 = QUITE EASY

2

2

3

3 =VERY EASY

3

4

4

MEAN VALUES

2.0

2.25

2.25

0 = NONE

1

0

0

1 = A LITTLE

2

4

3

2 = SOME

4

3

2

3 = A LOT
MEAN VALUES

1

1

3

1.625

1.625

2.0

An eye-tracking-BCI hybrid system for example could replace the
SSVEP BCI element with an eye-tracker to allow for easier and
more granular placement of items, or the use of brushes etc found
in conventional PC based paint packages. The BCI element could
complement this by using the intended movement paradigm for
command selections (colour etc.) For example a palette of colours
could map (arbitrarily) as follows: tongue=red, left hand= green;
right hand=yellow; feet=blue. This assumes that four categories
can be reliably distinguished, which is difficult for most subjects.
Thus calibration and personalisation would be required, scaling
back to three or two commands, as appropriate. Another potential
variation would be to use two screens, the SSVEP system shown
here for control (command selection etc.) and a separate screen
controlled by the eye-tracker for free-form painting. Indeed it may
also be possible to extract features from the EEG to automatically
influence certain attributes of a canvas, e.g. power in certain
frequency bands or temporal components. This would introduce a
less deterministic element, and could potentially tap in creativity
in abled-bodied and disabled people alike.
Such additions would be much more sophisticated than the system
described in this paper. Acceptance of such technology is still a
key issue for BCI. As outlined in the roadmap [17], BCI
technology will emerge into more of a plug and play technology,
with gaming and entertainment in the vanguard. Major advances
are to be expected in BCI gaming technology in particular, as
companies invest further in this technology. Doubtless BCI and its
potential for assessing creativity will benefit by this.

7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the support of Google in the funding of
the studentship for the lead author. The authors wish to thank
Carole Connelly, art therapist at Musgrave Park Hospital, Belfast,
UK for her general advice and experienced clinical judgment that
was of invaluable help. We also thank and acknowledge Joan
McAleer, Alex McRoberts and Melanie Ware for support with the
software and experiments. The BRAIN consortium gratefully
acknowledges the support of the European Commission’s ICT for
Inclusion Unit, under grant agreement No. 224156.

[6] BBC News online 5, The robot that reads your mind to train
itself, Oct 2010, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology11457127, accessed Jan 2012.
[7] BBC News online 6, Real-life Jedi: Pushing the limits of
mind
control,
Oct
2011,
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-15200386, accessed
Jan 2012.
[8] Berger, T.W., Gerhardt, G., Liker, M.A. & Soussou, W.
2008, The Impact of Neurotechnology on Rehabilitation,
Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Reviews in, vol. 1, pp. 157197.
[9] Bernardo, D.S., Matteucci, M., and Mainardi, L. Online
Detection of P300 and Error Potentials in a BCI Speller,
Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, vol. 2010,
Article ID 307254, 5 pages, 2010.
[10] Blankertz, B., Krauledat, M., Dornhege, G., Williamson, J.,
Murray-Smith, R., Müller, K.R.: A Note on Brain Actuated
Spelling with the Berlin Brain Computer Interface. In
Universal Access in HCI, Part II, HCII 2007, Volume 4555
of LNCS Edited by: Stephanidis C. Berlin Heidelberg:
Springer; 2007:759-768
[11] BRAINABLE,
http://www.brainable.org/en/Pages/Home.aspx, accessed Jan
2012.
[12] Dan, W., Chaoyi, L., Yu, Y., Changzheng, Z. & Dezhong, Y.
2010, Music Composition from the Brain Signal:
Representing the Mental State by Music, Computational
Intelligence and Neuroscience - Special issue on processing
of brain signals by using hemodynamic and
neuroelectromagnetic modalities Volume 2010, January
2010 Hindawi Publishing Corp. New York, NY, United
States.
[13] Edlinger, G., Holzner, C., Guger, C., Groenegress, C. &
Slater, M. 2009, Brain-computer interfaces for goal
orientated control of a virtual smart home environment,
Neural Engineering, 2009. NER'09. 4th International
IEEE/EMBS Conference on IEEE, , pp. 463.
[14] Emotiv, http://www.emotiv.com/, accessed Jan 2012.

8. REFERENCES
[1] Allison, B. The I of BCIs: Next Generation Interfaces for
Brain–Computer Interface Systems That Adapt to Individual
User. In Human-Computer Interaction. Novel Interaction
Methods and Techniques, LNCS, Springer Berlin /
Heidelberg, Vol 5611/2009.
[2] BBC News online 1, World premiere of brain orchestra,
April 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/8016869.stm,
accessed Jan 2012.
[3] BBC News online 2, Wheelchair 'reads minds' to move, June
2009,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/sci/tech/8127090.stm,
accessed Jan 2012.
[4] BBC News online 3, The power of thought Oct 2009,
http://news.bbc.co.uk/nol/ukfs_news/hi/newsid_8290000/ne
wsid_8293100/8293178.stm, accessed Jan 2012.
[5] BBC News online 4, Brains take over from video game
controllers,
July
2010,
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-10647555, accessed
Jan 2012.

[15] Ferreira A., Silva, R. L. , Celeste W. C. , Bastos Filho, T.
F. and Sarcinelli Filho, M., “Human–machine interface based
on muscular and brain signals applied to a robotic
wheelchair,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series, volume
90, 012094, 2007.
[16] Filho, S.A.S., Tierra-Criollo, C.J., Souza, A.P., Pinto,
M.A.S., Lima, M.L.C., Manzano, G.M., Magnitude Squared
of Coherence to Detect Imaginary Movement, EURASIP
Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, vol. 2009, Article
ID 534536, 12 pages, 2009.
[17] Future BCNI A roadmap for future directions in Brain/
Neuronal Computer Interaction, http://futurebnci.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=section&id=
10&Itemid=55, accessed Jan 2012.
[18] Garcia-Molina, G. and Mihajlovic, V. Spatial filters to detect
Steady State Visual Evoked Potentials elicited by high
frequency stimulation: BCI application. Journal of
Biomedizinische Technik / Biomedical Engineering, 3(55),
pp. 173-182, 2010.
[19] George, H., Hösle, A., Franz, D., Kübler, A., (2010). Brain
Painting – BCI Meets Patients and Artists in the Field,

Integrating Brain-Computer Interfaces with Conventional
Assistive Technology, TOBI Workshop 2010, Graz, Austria,
February 3-4, 2010, www.tobi-project.org/publications/,
accessed November 2010.
[20] Girouard, A., Solovey, E.T., Hirshfield, L.M., Chauncey, K.,
Sassaroli, A., Fantini, S., Jacob, R.J.K., Distinguishing
Difficulty Levels with Non-invasive Brain Activity
Measurements, Proceedings of the 12th IFIP TC 13
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction:
Part I, August 24-28, 2009, Uppsala, Sweden.
[21] Halder, S., Furdea, A., Leeb, R., Müller-Putz, G., Hösle, A.,
Kübler A. (2009). “Implementation of SMR based brain
painting,” in Poster at COST Neuromath Workshop. Leuven,
Belgium.
[22] Hirshfield, L. M., Solovey, E. T., Girouard, A., Kebinger, J.,
Jacob, R.J.K., Sassaroli, A., Fantini, S., Brain measurement
for usability testing and adaptive interfaces: an example of
uncovering syntactic workload with functional near infrared
spectroscopy, Proceedings of the 27th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems, April
04-09, 2009, Boston, MA, USA.
[23] Interactive Mindball provide BCI biofeedback products
(http://www.mindball.se/product.html), accessed Jan 2012.
[24] Pfurtscheller, G., Allison, B. Z., Bauernfeind, G., Brunner,
C., Solis Escalante, T., Scherer, R., Zander, T. O., MüllerPutz, G., Neuper, C., Birbaumer, N. (2010). The hybrid BCI.
Front. Neurosci.4:42doi:10.3389/fnpro.2010.00003. doi:
10.3389/fnpro.2010.00003.
[25] Klonowski, W., Duch, W, Perovic, A., and Jovanovic, A.,
“Some Computational Aspects of the Brain Computer
Interfaces Based on Inner Music,” Computational
Intelligence and Neuroscience, vol. 2009, Article ID 950403,
9 pages, 2009. doi:10.1155/2009/950403.

[30] Millán, J.R., Rupp, R., Müller-Putz, G., Murray-Smith, R.,
Giugliemma, C., Tangermann, M., Vidaurre, C., Cincotti, F.,
Kübler, A. & Leeb, R. 2010, Combining Brain–Computer
Interfaces and Assistive Technologies: State-of-the-Art and
Challenges, Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol 4, article 161, p
1-15, 2010.
[31] Miranda, E.R. 2010, Plymouth brain-computer music
interfacing project: from EEG audio mixers to composition
informed by cognitive neuroscience, International Journal of
Arts and Technology, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 154-176.
[32] Münßinger, J.I., Halder, S., Kleih S.C., Furdea A., Raco, V.,
Hösle, A and Kübler, A. (2010) Brain Painting: first
evaluation of a new brain-computer interface application
with ALS-patients and healthy volunteers. Front. Neurosci.
4:182. doi: 10.3389/fnins. 2010.00182.
[33] Neurosky, http://www.neurosky.com/, accessed Jan 2012.
[34] Nijholt, A., Reuderink, B. & Oude Bos, D. 2009, Turning
shortcomings into challenges: Brain-computer interfaces for
games,
Intelligent
Technologies
for
Interactive
Entertainment, Springer, pp. 153-168.
[35] Plass-Oude Bos, D., Reuderink, B., Laar, B., Gürkök, H.,
Mühl, C., Poel, M., Nijholt, A. & Heylen, D. 2010, BrainComputer Interfacing and Games. In Tan, D., Nijholt, A.,
(ed.s), Brain-Computer Interfaces: Applying Our Minds to
Human-Computer Interaction, ch. 10, pp. 149-178, Springer,
Heidelberg, 2010.
[36] Rapoport, E.D., Nishimura, E.M., Zadra, J.R., Wubbels,
P.M., Proffitt, D.R., Downs, T.H. & Downs, J.H. 2008,
Engaging, Non-Invasive Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs)
for Improving Training Effectiveness Enabling Creative
Expression, Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting Proceedings, Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society, pp. 591.

[26] Leeb, R., Lee, F., Keinrath, C., Scherer, R., Bischof, H. &
Pfurtscheller, G. 2007, Brain–computer communication:
motivation, aim, and impact of exploring a virtual apartment,
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 473-482.

[37] Schalk, G., McFarland, D.J., Hinterberger, T., Birbaumer, N.
& Wolpaw, J.R. 2004, BCI2000: a general-purpose braincomputer interface (BCI) system, Biomedical Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1034-1043.

[27] Maeder C., Sannelli, C., Haufe, S., Lemm, S., Blankertz, B.
(2010). Effect of prestimulus SMR amplitude on BCI
performance. Poster at the TOBI Workshop ‘Integrating
Brain-Computer Interfaces with Conventional Assistive
Technology’ in Graz.

[39] Vaadia, E. & Birbaumer, N. 2009, Grand challenges of brain
computer interfaces in the years to come, Frontiers in
Neuroscience, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 151.

[28] McAleer, J., “Brain Computer Interface or Creative
Expression”, MSc Thesis, University of Ulster, 2010.
[29] McCullagh, P., Ware, M., Lightbody, G., Mulvenna, M.,
McAllister, G. and Nugent, C. A Brain Computer Interface
for Enhanced Inclusion, The first “Augmented Human (AH)”
International Conference, Megève, France, April 2-3 2010.
ACM Digital Library ISBN 978-1-60558-825-4.

[38] Starlab (http://starlab.es/products/enobio), accessed Jan 2012

[40] Volosyak, I., Cecotti, H., Valbuena, D. & Graser, A. 2009,
Evaluation of the Bremen SSVEP based BCI in real world
conditions, Proc of IEEE International Conference on
Rehabilitation Robotics, 2009, pp. 322.
[41] Zhu, D., Bieger, J., Molina, G.G. & Aarts, R.M. 2010, A
survey of stimulation methods used in SSVEP-based BCIs,
Computational intelligence and neuroscience, vol. 1, pp.
7023.

