INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS

Volume 9, 2015

Application of Multivariate Empirical Mode
Decomposition in EEG signals for Subject
Independent Affective States Classification
Haiyanl Xu, Student Member, IEEE, Konstantinos N. Plataniotis, Fellow, IEEE

pleasantness or unpleasantness). For example, fear emerges
as a combination of negative valence and high arousal.

Abstract—Physiological signals, EEG in particular, are inherently noisy and non-linear in nature which are challenging to
work with using conventional linear signal processing methods.
In this paper, we are adopting a new signal processing method,
Multivariate Empirical Mode Decomposition, as a preprocessing
method to reconstruct EEG signals according to its instantaneous
frequencies. To test its effectiveness, we applied this signal reconstruction technique on EEG signals for a 2-dimensional affect
states classification application. To evaluated the proposed EEG
signal processing system, a three-class classification experiment
were carried out on the Emobrain dataset from eNTERFACE’06
with K-nearest neighbours (KNN) and Linear Discriminate Analysis (LDA) as classifiers. A leave-one-subject out cross validation
process were used and an averaged correct classification rate
of 90.77% were achieved. Another main contribution of this
paper was inspired by the growth of non-medical grade EEG
headsets and its potential in advanced human-computer interface
design. However, to reduce cost and invasiveness, consumer
grade EEG headsets have far less number of electrodes. In this
paper, we used emotion recognition as a case study, and applied
Genetic Algorithm to systematically select the critical channels
(or sensor locations) for this application. The results of this study
provide much needed insights on sensor configuration for future
consumer-grade EEG headset design.

Fig. 1: Dimensional Representation of Emotion [1]
In recent years, many studies of physiological signals,
e.g. heart rate, blood pressure, galvanic skin response and
respiration rate, though generally more invasive than facial
image or voice based modalities, have delivered substantially
more accurate results on the estimation of affective states.
However, these physiological signals, can also vary due to nonemotional factors such as, physical activity or environmental
(temperature) changes, which cast great doubt on the practical
applications of these signals. Electroencephalogram (EEG)
signals, on the other hand, are generated from the Central
Nervous System (CNS) and directly reflect the brain activity,
which can potentially overcome these challenges.
The EEG is a measurement of the electrical activity within
the brain [2] that is produced by synchronous neural activities.
Extra-cranial EEG signals are captured using multiple electrodes resting on the scalp that are spatially located according
to a specific system known as the 10-20 system [3]. EEG
signals are time series indicating the oscillatory nature of
the brainwaves. EEG signals are non-linear, non-stationary
and usually contaminated with substantial amount of noise
caused by thermal fluctuations, artefacts (muscle movements,
electrodes movements) and technical interference (power line).
It is very challenging to infer EEG signals in its raw timedomain format without any signal processing procedures. It is
also a challenging signal processing problem since EEG signal
violates the stationary assumption that are assumed in many

Index Terms—Multivariate empirical mode decomposition,
EEG, Genetic Algorithm, Affective signal processing, HumanComputer Interfaces

I. I NTRODUCTION
Ffective states classification has become an important
part of the Human-Computer Interface (HCI) study.
Affective states are the physiological expression of emotion,
but unlike emotion itself, which is typically a very personal
experience that is influenced by many factors such as, one’s
past experience, education and cultural background, affective
expressions can be measured and quantized. There are many
theories for emotion modeling and representation, but the most
recognized is the circumplex model of emotion, which represents emotional states as continuous points on a two or three
dimensional space, e.g., a 2-D model shown in Fig. 1. In this
dimensional theories of emotion, emotional states have unique
physiological and neural profiles that distinguish them from
one another, and are represented as a combination of more
fundamental dimensions, such as emotional arousal (strength
or intensity of emotion) and emotional valence (degree of

A

Haiyan Xu and Konstantinos N. Plataniotis are with The Edward S.
Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University
of Toronto, 10 King’s College Road, Toronto, ON, M5S3G4, CANADA, email: xuhaiyan@comm.utoronto.ca, kostas@comm.utoronto.ca

ISSN: 1998-4480

91

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS

Volume 9, 2015

conventional time-series analysis methods.
This paper is divided into five parts. First, an overview
on the concept of emotion/affect recognition is introduced.
Then the multivariate empirical mode decomposition (MEMD)
as a preprocessing method for EEG signal is presented and
discussed, particularly on its application as an instantaneous
frequency (IF) based filter bank, which can reconstruct the
signal components of interesting with least distortion. The
third part is a discussion on using EEG signal as a modality for
affective states classification, as well as the challenges faced by
such systems. In the forth part, due to the increasing diversity
of non-medical grade EEG headsets, a channel selection
method, Genetic Algorithm, is introduced to systematically
select the critical channels for affect detection purposes. In the
last part of the paper, two experiments designed to examine
the proposed system and their simulation results are discussed
and compared to the results in the literature.

of analytical signals or Hilbert transform [5]. Multi-component
refers to the cases that there are multi-extremas between
two consecutive zero-crossings for a oscillating signal, which
indicates the coexisting of multiple frequency components at
any given time instance.
Multi−components of EEG Signal
70

Instantaneous Frequency

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

2

Time (Sec.)

3

4

Fig. 2: Multicomponent Characteristics of the EEG signals

II. EEG BASED A FFECTIVE S IGNAL P ROCESSING S YSTEM
There are three main components for such affect classification systems using physiological (e.g., EEG) signals,
the preprocessing step, the feature extraction and selection
(optional) step and the classification step. Each step has its own
challenges, for example, EEG signal is prone to noises, such
as muscle movement, eye-blinking,especially for the signals
collected over the scalp. However, due to the fact that the
neural signals are sourced from a non-linear process, action
potential at the individual neuron level, traditional linear signal
processing methods are less effective to eliminate or reduce
the non-informative components.
Another challenge lies in the selection of a suitable feature
extraction and/or selection method.This challenge is imposed
by practical constraints, for example, for such stochastic
learning systems, the number of samples available usually are
much smaller than the dimension of the features. This is due to
the fact that data collection is labor intensive, the requirements
of manual labeling of input data, the experimental setup is
often preventative of every large data set (both in terms of
number of subjects and number of individual trials). We start
by ensemble four sets of features that were well studied in the
literature for this study. Due to the high dimension of features
and the challenge of sample sizes, genetic algorithm (GA) is
utilized as a feature selection algorithm. Genetic Algorithm
is a non-ranking global optimization method that maximize a
set optimization criterion, for this study, we have chosen the
correct classification rate as a fitness function.

As shown in Fig. 2, a multiple component signal has a
spectrum where multiple intrinsic frequencies super-imposed
at each time instance.

signal

Fs=256

imf1

57.14Hz

imf2

26.25Hz

imf3

11.95Hz

imf4

6.89Hz

imf5

3.29Hz

res. imf9 imf8 imf7 imf6

Empirical Mode Decomposition

1.74Hz
0.55Hz
0.09Hz
0.09Hz
Trend

Fig. 3: Instantaneous Amplitude and Averaged Frequency of
the IMFs

III. S IGNAL R ECONSTRUCTION USING MEMD AS A
F ILTER BANK

EEG signal is reconstructed based on its Instantaneous
Frequencies at each time instance, without the requirement
of any information at other time instances. To do so, EEG
signal is first decomposed into a series of IMFs, as shown in
Fig. 3, each with its own instantaneous frequency (IF). The
IMFs within the desired frequency range will be summed to
obtain the reconstructed signal. This is very different from
the conventional filtering process, since the filtered result is
adaptive, and is able to extract signal components that are

Empirical mode decomposition is a time-frequency analysis method that were proposed in recently years. EMD has
been shown to be effective in analyzing non-linear and nonstationary signals through the use of Instantaneous Frequency
(IF) obtained using Hilbert-Huang Transform (HHT) [4]. In
this method, a multi-component (spectral) signal is reduced
into a set of mono-component functions, which is referred to
as Intrinsic mode functions (IMFs), through the construction
ISSN: 1998-4480

1

92

5

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS

Volume 9, 2015

over-lapping both in time and frequency. This is mainly due
to the fact that the result is not influenced by a set of a priori
basis and no convolution procedure required. Other methods,
such as wavelet analysis, a predetermined basis, is convolved
with the multiple component signal in time and to re-fine the
frequency resolution, the ’mother’ wavelet is scaled at each
decomposition level (expand by a factor of α in time will
result a α1 change is the frequency domain).
Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) has been used in
emotion recognition study using EEG and shown promising
results. However there are many unsolved challenges in terms
of the application of this method on multi-channel inputs,
first of all, since this decomposition method is entirely datadriven, and the decomposition level depends on the time
domain local characteristics, the number of decomposition
levels varies between channels, recording scenario (trials and
sessions). Therefore, to define a common feature space is
very challenging or impossible. This prompt the adaption of
multivariate version of the EMD, which ensures the same
number of IMFs across all multi-variables (or channels), and
also the mode alignment problem (see Fig. 4). Mode alignment
in multivariate data corresponds to finding a set of common
scales or modes across different components (variables) of a
multivariate signal, thus ensuring that the IMFs are matched
both in the number and in scale properties.

IMFs obtained using Multivariate EMD
−2

10

PSD in Log scale

−4

−8

0

10

can vary between EEG segments and recordings, particularly
from different subjects. Therefore, to simply summing IMFs
by their decomposition level is not feasible. Furthermore, if we
naively summing up IMF components that within the desired
frequency band, we might potentially cause discontinuity
or spurious effect in the reconstructed EEG. One possible
solution, as discussed in [7], was to use a weight matrix to
optimize the selection of IMF components and maintain the
continuity of the background components.
We now consider a unique reconstruction method based
on the Hilbert-Huang spectrum which we refer to as HilbertHuang (HH) reconstruction. To do this, we first calculate the
instantaneous frequency of each IMFs, as shown in Fig. 2,
and given a signal d(k), we propose to remove any unwanted
frequency information outside of the (spectral) region of
interest, and reconstruct a signal, d(k), that retains only desired
frequency characteristics from d(k).This is achieved by first
decomposing d(k) into a set of N IMFs, ci (k), and determining
the instantaneous frequencies. fi (k) denotes the instantaneous
frequency of the ith IMF at time instant k. Given the scenario
where it is required to retain frequencies greater than flow and
lower than fhigh , we have
(
ci (k), if flow < fi (k) < fhigh
c̃i (k) =
(1)
0
otherwise

PSD in Log Scale

−4

10

−6

10

−8

10

1

2

10
Frequency

Fig. 4: Mode alignment problem when using regular EMD as
a filter bank
MEMD is an analysis method that in many aspects gives
a better understanding of the physics behind the signals
[5]. Because of its ability to describe short time changes
in frequencies that cannot be resolved by Fourier spectral
analysis, it can be used for nonlinear and nonstationary time
series analysis. Each extracted signal admits well-defined
instantaneous frequency (see Fig. 5). Due to the above stated
properties, MEMD can be used effectively as a filter bank
to extract frequency components of interest for EEG signal
analysis. As stated in Sec. I, physiological signals like EEG
is very noisy and denoising such signals is one of the most
important step. Effective filtering process will enable better
understanding of the underlying physiological process and the
intrinsic characteristics or sources more accessible.
In [6], 3 − 5 IMFs were selected for each channel to
reconstruct the EEG signal. However, we found that the
number of IMFs and the instantaneous frequency of each IMF
ISSN: 1998-4480

2

10

Fig. 5: Well-defined instantaneous frequencies for each IMF
when using MEMD as a filter bank

IMFs obtained using Regular EMD

10

1

10

Frequency

−2

0

−6

10

10

10

10

10

Essentially all values of ci (k) that do not fall within the
˜
desired frequency range are set to zero. We can construct d(k)
by summation of the IMF values that fall within the desired
frequency range, to obtain
˜ =
d(k)

N
X

c̃i (k)

(2)

i=1

A. Feature Extraction
Two types of features were extracted from the reconstructed
time-domain EEG signal. One is the features based on the
statistical features of the time-domain signal, and the other,
higher order crossing, is to examine the oscillatory mode or
complexity of the time-domain signal.
93

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS

Volume 9, 2015

B. Genetic Algorithm
Initial Signal

Due to the large number of IMFs produced after the
decomposition along with a large number of EEG channels
present, there is much redundancy in the features directly
extracted from all IMFs. There are two problems present
due to the high dimension of feature space, first of all, it
is the computation complexity and secondly, a very large
number of samples are required to produce a meaningful
statistical model [10]. Since we have a small number of
observations comparing to the dimension of the features, also
the uncertainty of which electrodes provides more information
in terms of discriminating one emotion class from the other.
Generic Algorithm is applied to reduce the number of channels
and the number of IMFs for feature extraction analysis. The
objective here is to use GA on the collection features in hope
to reduce the feature dimension and also discover the main
class-specific features, to boost classification performance.

0
0

MEMD Filtering

1

MEMD-IMFs Extraction

1
0

1
0

0

IMFs Selection

0

0
0

0
0

Feature Analysis

Signal Reconstruction

Statistical

HOC

Feature Vector

Classification

LDA, kNN

Affect Recognition
Rate

Pos. exited, Neg. excited, Neutral
EEG
Features

0
0

Fig. 6: MEMD for Signal Reconstruction and Feature Analysis

1
1
0

Initial
Population

1
0
0
0

Fitness
Calculation

1) Statistical-based Features: The statistical features proposed by Picard [8] for physiological signals were used
here to form the proposed FVs, which were defined as
(Xt , t = 1, ..., N is the raw N-sample EEG signal) given in
the following. The mean of the raw signals µx , the standard
deviation of the raw signals σx , the mean of the absolute values
of the first differences of the raw signals δx , the mean of
the absolute values of the first differences of the normalized
signals δ x , the mean of the absolute values of the second
differences of the raw signals γx , and the mean of the absolute
values of the second differences of the normalized signals γ x .
2) Higher Order Crossings: Observed time series of physiological signals such as EEG, display both local and global
up and down movements. Characteristics of the oscillatory
mode process discrimination powers and can be extracted
as features for classification purpose.The oscillation behavior,
seen in a finite zero-mean time series Zt , t = 1, ...N can be
expressed through the zero-crossing count. When a specific
sequence of filters is applied to a time series, the corresponding
sequence of zero-crossing counts is obtained, resulting in the
so-called HOC sequence [9]. Let Z1 , Z2 , ..., ZN be a zeromean stationary time series, the zero-crossing count in discrete
time is defined as the number of symbol changes in the
corresponding clipped binary time series [9]
(
1, if Zt ≥ 0
Xt =
(3)
0, if Zt < 0

N
X
[Xt − Xt−1 ]2 , 0 ≤ D ≤ N − 1

0

No

Yes

Crossover

Mutation

Optimal
Features

Updated
Population

Fig. 7: The block diagram for Genetic Algorithm
Generic algorithm is a non-ranking, global optimization algorithm that was introduced in [11]. The optimization process
is mimicking the natural selection from a large population
members. It iteratively modifies (mutates) a population of
individuals (variables of the features space) to maximize a
fitness criterion. At each step, genetic algorithm tries to select
the best individuals, which will be used to allow the generation
of offsprings (with set crossover rates). Over successive generations, the generation evolves towards an optimal solution. The
algorithm terminates when maximum generation is reached.
The selection of maximum generation is typically chosen when
the fitness criterion (or performance0 stabilizes.
There are mainly three parameters that governs the process
at each step (see Figure. 7):
1. Select the individuals (parents) to generate next generation
2. Crossover rules applied to combine two parents to form
children for the next generation
3. Mutation rules apply random changes to individual parents
to form children

(4)
Related papers [12], [13] have shown that genetic algo-

t=2

ISSN: 1998-4480

0
0

Continue
Evolution?

The number of zero-crossings, denoted by D, is defined in
terms of Xt
D=

0

94

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS

Volume 9, 2015

rithms, from the nonranking group, can be successfully applied
to feature selection. When using ranking methods such as Principle Component Analysis (PCA) the chosen feature vectors
can contain features that are correlated with each other and
at the same time do not bring in significant new information
for the classifier. When use the correct classification rate as a
fitness measure, Genetic algorithm will choose features that
are most representative to the class labels. Another major
advantages of Genetic Algorithm is the fact that we are able
to represent our features and electrodes in binary form to for
feature reduction, which differs greatly from the conventional,
ranking based methods such as Principle Component Analysis
(PCA) or Linear Discriminate Analysis (LDA).
On the other hand, the main disadvantage is the fact the
fitness criterion is calculated based on a large number of
samples, population at each generation times the number of
generations, which can take a long time to compute before
a result can be obtained. Also due to the randomness of
mutation and crossover at each generation, each run of genetic
algorithm creates slightly different set of features. Since the
features are not ranked, in general, we do not know which
feature is more significant in the classification process later
on. Therefore, to elevate the above two shortcomings and to
learn the importance of each features, multiple runs of genetic
algorithm is proposed and the features with higher frequencies
in appearance are considered to be more significant and are
selected in the channel reduction process. It also enables us to
determine where to place the electrodes and which frequencies
of EEG spectrum are the most important.

participated emotions were elicited in subjects using images
from the IAPS (International Affective Picture System) [16]. It
consists emotionally-driven physiologically signals from both
the peripheral (galvanic skin response, respiration and blood
volume pressure) and central nervous system (EEG and frontal
fNIRS). Since our study is focused only on brainwaves, we
have only used the EEG recordings. More details can be found
in [17].

Fig. 8: Protocol description for eNTERFACE06-EMOBRAIN
database
EEG data were collected from 5 participants, aged from
22-38, for three different sessions with 30 trials per session.
The experimental protocol is detailed in Fig. 8. For each
session, participants were stimulated using images selected
from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS) [16].
The images were divided into three categories: negatively
excited, neutral and positive excited based on their valence
and arousal scores. These thresholds were imperially defined
according to the circumplex model shown in Fig.1. Each trial
consists of a block of five images selected for the same affect
class, this to insure stability of the emotion over time. Each
picture was displayed on the screen for 2.5 seconds leading
to a total of 12.5 seconds per block. Blocks of different
classes were displayed in random order to avoid participant
habituation. The total number of observations obtained was
5 × 3 × 30 = 450. Biosemi active II headset was used during
the experiment, which has 64 channels, however, due to the
parallel recording of the fNIRS signals, only 54 EEG channels
were actually present in the dataset.

C. Fitness Functions
Fitness function as a selection criterion is to conserve
some of the characteristics of EEG signal in the feature
reduction process. Previously, methods to best preserve the
characteristics of EEG signals, such as the energy (eventrelated potential) and complexity (Fractal Dimension) have
been used in the literature. For example, fractal dimension
method has been used in the analysis of epileptic seizure
using EEG [14]. However, such selections of fitness function
gives no consideration of the association of features with
class labels or anything beyond each individual samples. Since
the objective of my study is to find the most discriminating
channels and frequency range, a different fitness function has
be to be considered. Here the correct classification rate is used
as a fitness measure for the GA.
The aim of the genetic algorithm is to maximize the fitness
function. As soon as the corresponding IMFs have been
chosen, with the inverse EMD algorithm, a new signal is
constructed only by the selected IMFs. Figure 7 demonstrates
the GA feature selection process in an EEG signal which
corresponds to the emotion of positively excited.

IV. R ESULTS AND D ISCUSSIONS
For the selected Emobrain database, there were 30 trials
for each session and three sessions in total for each subject.
However, upon further investigation, samples of subject one
collected during session 1 were excluded due to the different
sampling rate as well as the missing information on the IAPS
images used for this session, particularly after the discovery
that the eliciting images listed for this session was a duplicate
of session 2, which raised concerns on the validation of these
samples. Samples from subject 2 session 1 were also excluded
due to inconsistency in recording setting comparing to other
trials. Due the randomness of crossover and mutation process,
each run of genetic algorithm may result in a slightly varying
set of features. To solve this problem genetic algorithm was
applied ten times on the original set of features. Features were
ranked according to their averaged selection rate, as shown

D. Emobrain Dataset
To examine the performance of the designed EEG-based
affective signal processing system with MEMD as a preprocessing method, Emobrain dataset from the eNTERFACE’06
workshop [15] were used during the experiment. Five subjects
ISSN: 1998-4480

95

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS

Volume 9, 2015

TABLE I: Overview of the dataset
subject
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5

Used sessions
sess2,3
sess2,3
sess1,2,3
sess1,2,3
sess1,2,3

Total trials
300
300
450
450
450

Pos. Trials
100
100
150
150
150

TABLE III: Emotion Recognition rates using electrodes selected using GA

Neg. Trials
100
100
150
150
150

Number of Channels
18
10
6

in Fig. 9. Final set of features were selected by applying a
threshold value on the averaged selection rate.
Channel Selection using Genetic Algorithm

Frequency of Appearence

80

70%
60%
Channel Index
65%

70

HOC
90.21
62.05
88.77
56.31
89.79
53.21

TABLE IV: Recognition rates of emotion using channels
selected by GA

60
50
40

Method

30

All 54 channels

10

5

10

15

20

25
30
Channel Index

35

40

45

Number of Channels
Channel selected using GA

8∗ channels

18
10
6
5NN
90.77
89.64
89.23
88.77
89.79
LDA
79.64
43.13
62.05
56.31
53.21
* - Referenced to commercial device: Emotiv Epoc with 14 channels and
having 8 channels in common with the current setup

20

0

Statistical
80.97
48.92
79.74
43.03
76.46
40.82

Following the thought on the critical channel selection on
the system performance and also on the potential emotion
recognition applications using consumer-grade EEG headsets.
We further reduced the number of channels using GA as
well as reference the current setup to a well-known inmarket EEG headset, the Emotiv Epoch [18]. The correct

100
90

Classifier
5NN
LDA
5NN
LDA
5NN
LDA

50

Fig. 9: Channels selected through Genetic Algorithm
recognition rate using KNN classifier shown in Table IV are
very close when the number of electrodes were significantly
reduced from 54 to 10, then 6. More importantly, when we
selected 8 of the 14 channels present in a consumer-grade EEG
headset, Emotiv Epoc, very promising results were obtained
again. These results provided evidence on the feasibility of
consumer grade headsets for real-time, emotion recognition in
mobile applications. However, the recognition rate using LDA
decreases dramatically, this indicates that the samples of the
reduced channels are not linearly separable in the projected
feature space.

The following are the channels selected after 10 runs of
genetic algorithm. Channels of 18,10 and 6 were presented
here.
TABLE II: Channels selected using GA algorithm
Frequency of
Appearance
≥ 60%

Number of
Channels
18

> 65%

10

> 70%

6

Channels Selected
F t7, F c3, F c1, F cz, C3,
C1, P oz, Af 3, P 2, F c4,
Cp4, Cp6,T p8, F c4, Iz, O1,
P 10, F t8
F t7, F t8, F c3, F c4, F cz,
T p8, P 2, P 10, P oz, Iz
F t7, F t8, F c3, F c4, P 2,
P 10

V. C ONCLUSION
In summary, we have designed and implemented an EEGbased affective signal processing system using a novel timefrequency signal processing method, Multi-variate Empirical
Mode Decomposition (MEMD) as a preprocessing method.
Like wavelet methods, MEMD method will decompose the
original time series into a set of oscillatory modes, termed
as Intrinsic Mode Functions (IMFs), but unlike wavelet, we
are not restricted to a fixed, predefined set of wavelets, which
could be challenging to determine the most appropriate basis
for a particular application, or under the stationary or piecewise stationary assumption as required by other conventional
signal processing methods (e.g., Fourier based methods), but
is violated by most biomedical signals. A correct recognition
rate of 90.77% were achieved using HOC features and kNN
classifier on five subjects. Genetic algorithms were also implemented to examine the critical channels present for this
affective classification problem. Very promising results were
maintained when the number of channels were reduced from
54 to 18, 10 as well as 6.

For the subject independent affective classification problem,
10-fold leave-one-subject out cross validation process were
used. Table III shows the correct recognition rates for three
affective states: positively excited, neutral and negatively excited. Two simple classifiers were used here, the k nearest
neighbour (kNN) and the linear discriminate analysis (LDA).
Euclidean distance were used as a ranking metric for both
classifier and 5 neighbor were used for KNN.
The results shown that HOC is much more effective in
discriminating the affective states of the subjects. Also, by
reducing the channels from 18 to 6, system performance
degrade very slightly and gradually, which indicates that there
is definitely more informative channels existing for this pattern
classification problem. This finding provides very positive
confirmation on the possibilities towards the design and application of EEG signals on non-medical (emotion recognition)
applications.
ISSN: 1998-4480

96

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF COMMUNICATIONS

Volume 9, 2015

R EFERENCES

Haiyan Xu received her BASc and MASc degrees
from the Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of
Toronto, in 2010 and 2012 , respectively. Currently,
she is working towards the PhD degree in the
Edward S. Rogers Sr. Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, University of Toronto. Her
main research interests include affective computing,
pattern classification, physiological signals analysis
for emotion assessment and brain-computer interface. Her previous research works involves biometrics analysis from 2-D and 3D facial images, finger prints and ECG signals.
She is a student member of IEEE.

[1] S. Hamann, “Mapping discrete and dimensional emotions onto the brain:
controversies and consensus,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 16,
no. 9, pp. 458 – 466, 2012.
[2] E. Niedermeyer and F. Lopes da Silva, Electroencephalography: Basic
Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields, 5th ed. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, nov 2004.
[3] V. L. Towle, J. Bolaos, D. Suarez, K. Tan, R. Grzeszczuk, D. N. Levin,
R. Cakmur, S. A. Frank, and J.-P. Spire, “The spatial location of EEG
electrodes: locating the best-fitting sphere relative to cortical anatomy,”
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 86, no. 1,
pp. 1 – 6, 1993.
[4] N. E. Huang, “An adaptive data analysis method for nonlinear and
nonstationary time series: The empirical mode decomposition and hilbert
spectral analysis,” in Wavelet Analysis and Applications, ser. Applied
and Numerical Harmonic Analysis, T. Qian, M. I. Vai, and Y. Xu, Eds.
Birkhuser Basel, 2007, pp. 363–376.
[5] N. E. Huang, Z. Wu, S. R. Long, K. C. Arnold, X. Chen, and K. Blank,
“On instantaneous frequency,” World Scientific, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 177–
229, 2009.
[6] P. Petrantonakis and L. Hadjileontiadis, “Emotion recognition from
brain signals using hybrid adaptive filtering and higher order crossings
analysis,” Affective Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 2, pp.
81 –97, july-dec. 2010.
[7] D. Looney, L. Li, T. M. Rutkowski, D. P. Mandic, and A. Cichocki,
“Ocular artifacts removal from EEG using EMD,” in Advances in
Cognitive Neurodynamics ICCN 2007, R. Wang, E. Shen, and F. Gu,
Eds. Springer Netherlands, 2008, pp. 831–835.
[8] R. W. Picard, “Future affective technology for autism and emotion
communication,” vol. 364, no. 1535, pp. 3575–3584, 2009.
[9] B. Kedem, Time Series Analysis by Higher Order Crossings. Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineering (April 1994), Apr. 1994.
[10] D. L. Donoho, I. Johnstone, B. Stine, and G. Piatetsky-shapiro, “Highdimensional data analysis: The curses and blessings of dimensionality,”
Statistics, pp. 1–33, 2000.
[11] D. E. Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and
Machine Learning, Addison-WesleyEditors, Ed. Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[12] M. Schroder, M. Bogdan, T. Hinterberger, and N. Birbaumer, Automated
EEG feature selection for brain computer interfaces. IEEE, 2003, pp.
626–629.
[13] R. Sukanesh and R. Harikumar, “A comparison of genetic algorithm &
neural network (mlp) in patient specific classification of epilepsy risk
levels from EEG signals,” Engineering Letters, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 96–
104, 2007.
[14] G. Polychronaki, P. Ktonas, S. Gatzonis, P. Asvestas, E. Spanou,
A. Siatouni, H. Tsekou, D. Sakas, and K. Nikita, “Comparison of fractal
dimension estimation algorithms for epileptic seizure onset detection,”
in BioInformatics and BioEngineering, 2008. BIBE 2008. 8th IEEE
International Conference on, oct. 2008, pp. 1 –6.
[15] J. C. Mota, L. H. Viet, A. Caplier, and M. Rombaut, “Emotion detection
in the loop from brain signals and facial images,” 2006.
[16] P. J. Lang, M. M. Bradley, and B. N. Cuthbert, “International affective
picture system (IAPS): Affective ratings of pictures and instruction
manual,” University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[17] A. Savran, K. Ciftci, G. Chanel, J. C. Mota, L. H. Viet, B. Sankur,
L. Akarun, A. Caplier, and M. Rombaut, “Emotion Detection in the
Loop from Brain Signals and Facial Images,” in Proceedings of the
eNTERFACE 2006 Workshop, Dubrovnik, Croatia, Jul. 2006.
[18] (2015) The Emotiv Epoc website. [Online]. Available: http://www.
emotiv.com/apps/epoc/

ISSN: 1998-4480

Konstantinos N. Plataniotis Bell Canada Chair in
Multimedia, is a Professor with the ECE Department
at the University of Toronto. He received his B. Eng.
degree in Computer Engineering from University
of Patras, Greece and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in Electrical Engineering from Florida Institute of
Technology Melbourne, Florida. His research interests are: multimedia systems, biometrics, image
& signal processing, communications systems and
pattern recognition. Dr. Plataniotis is a Fellow of
IEEE, Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada,
a registered professional engineer in the province of Ontario, and a member
of the Technical Chamber of Greece.
He is a registered professional engineer in Ontario, Fellow of the IEEE
and Fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada. Dr. Plataniotis is the IEEE
Signal Processing Society inaugural Vice President for Membership (20142016).

97

