REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE

Form Approved OMB NO. 0704-0188

The public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions,
searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Send comments
regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this collection of information, including suggesstions for reducing this burden, to Washington
Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington VA, 22202-4302.
Respondents should be aware that notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall be subject to any oenalty for failing to comply with a collection
of information if it does not display a currently valid OMB control number.
PLEASE DO NOT RETURN YOUR FORM TO THE ABOVE ADDRESS.

1. REPORT DATE (DD-MM-YYYY)

2. REPORT TYPE

3. DATES COVERED (From - To)
-

New Reprint
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE

5a. CONTRACT NUMBER

Biosensor Technologies for Augmented Brain&#x2013;
Computer Interfaces in the Next Decades

5b. GRANT NUMBER

W911NF-09-1-0510

6. AUTHORS

5c. PROGRAM ELEMENT NUMBER
611102
5d. PROJECT NUMBER

Lun-De Liao, Chin-Teng Lin, K. McDowell, A. E. Wickenden, K.
Gramann, Tzyy-Ping Jung, Li-Wei Ko, Jyh-Yeong Chang

5e. TASK NUMBER
5f. WORK UNIT NUMBER

7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAMES AND ADDRESSES
University of California - San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
MC 0934
La Jolla, CA

8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT
NUMBER

92093 -0934
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS
(ES)

10. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S ACRONYM(S)
ARO
11. SPONSOR/MONITOR'S REPORT
NUMBER(S)

U.S. Army Research Office
P.O. Box 12211
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-2211

56490-CS.21

12. DISTRIBUTION AVAILIBILITY STATEMENT
Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
13. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this report are those of the author(s) and should not contrued as an official Department
of the Army position, policy or decision, unless so designated by other documentation.
14. ABSTRACT

The study of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) has undergone 30 years of intense development and has grown into a
rich and diverse field. BCIs are technologies that enable direct communication between the human brain and
external devices. Conventionally, wet electrodes have been employed to obtain unprecedented sensitivity to hightemporal-resolution brain activity; recently, the growing availability of various sensors that can be used to detect
high-quality brain signals in a wide range of clinical and everyday environments is being exploited. This
development of biosensing neurotechnologies and the desire to implement them in real-world applications have led
15. SUBJECT TERMS
Augmented brain–computer interface (ABCI);biosensor; cognitive-state monitoring; electroencephalogram(EEG); human brain
imaging

16. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION OF:
a. REPORT b. ABSTRACT c. THIS PAGE
UU
UU
UU

17. LIMITATION OF
ABSTRACT
UU

15. NUMBER 19a. NAME OF RESPONSIBLE PERSON
OF PAGES
Tzyy-Ping Jung
19b. TELEPHONE NUMBER

858-366-8914
Standard Form 298 (Rev 8/98)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39.18

Report Title
Biosensor Technologies for Augmented Brain&#x2013;Computer Interfaces in the Next Decades
ABSTRACT
The study of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) has undergone 30 years of intense development and has grown into a
rich and diverse field. BCIs are technologies that enable direct communication between the human brain and external
devices. Conventionally, wet electrodes have been employed to obtain unprecedented sensitivity to high-temporalresolution brain activity; recently, the growing availability of various sensors that can be used to detect high-quality
brain signals in a wide range of clinical and everyday environments is being exploited. This development of
biosensing neurotechnologies and the desire to implement them in real-world applications have led to the opportunity
to develop augmented BCIs (ABCIs) in the upcoming decades. An ABCI is similar to a BCI in that it relies on
biosensors that record signals from the brain in everyday environments; the signals are then processed in real time to
monitor the behavior of the human. To use an ABCI as a mobile brain imaging technique for everyday, real-life
applications, the sensors and the corresponding device must be lightweight and the equipment response time must be
short. This study presents an overview of the wide range of biosensor approaches currently being applied to ABCIs,
from their use in the laboratory to their application in clinical and everyday use. The basic principles of each
technique are described along with examples of current applications of cutting-edge neuroscience research. In
summary, we show that ABCI techniques continue to grow and evolve, incorporating new technologies and advances
to address ever more complex and important neuroscience issues, with advancements that are envisioned to lead to a
wide range of real-life applications.

REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE (SF298)
(Continuation Sheet)
Continuation for Block 13

ARO Report Number 56490.21-CS
Biosensor Technologies for Augmented Brain&#x2013;Computer
Interfaces in the Next Decades
...

Block 13: Supplementary Note
© 2012 . Published in Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. Ed. 0 100, (0) (2012), (, (0). DoD Components reserve a royalty-free,
nonexclusive and irrevocable right to reproduce, publish, or otherwise use the work for Federal purposes, and to authroize others
to do so (DODGARS §32.36). The views, opinions and/or findings contained in this report are those of the author(s) and should
not be construed as an official Department of the Army position, policy or decision, unless so designated by other
documentation.
Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.

INVITED
PAPER

Biosensor Technologies for
Augmented Brain–Computer
Interfaces in the Next Decades
This paper focuses on recent and projected advances of a wide range of sensor and
acquisition neurotechnologies enabling online brain–signal processing in everyday,
real-life environments, and highlights current and future approaches to
address the challenges in this field.
By Lun-De Liao, Member IEEE , Chin-Teng Lin, Fellow IEEE ,
Kaleb McDowell, Senior Member IEEE , Alma E. Wickenden, Member IEEE ,
Klaus Gramann, Tzyy-Ping Jung, Senior Member IEEE , Li-Wei Ko, Member IEEE , and
Jyh-Yeong Chang, Member IEEE

ABSTRACT | The study of brain–computer interfaces (BCIs) has

devices. Conventionally, wet electrodes have been employed to

undergone 30 years of intense development and has grown
into a rich and diverse field. BCIs are technologies that enable

obtain unprecedented sensitivity to high-temporal-resolution
brain activity; recently, the growing availability of various sen-

direct communication between the human brain and external

sors that can be used to detect high-quality brain signals in a
wide range of clinical and everyday environments is being
exploited. This development of biosensing neurotechnologies

Manuscript received November 28, 2011; accepted December 20, 2011.
Date of publication March 12, 2012; date of current version May 10, 2012.
L.-D. Liao and C.-T. Lin contributed equally to this work. This work was supported
in part by the UST-UCSD International Center of Excellence in Advanced Bio-engineering
sponsored by the Taiwan National Science Council I-RiCE Program under Contracts
NSC-99-2911-I-010-101 and NSC-100-2911-I-010-101, in part by the National Science
Council, Taiwan, under Contract NSC 100-2321-B-009-003, and in part by the Aiming for
the Top University Plan of National Chiao Tung University, the Ministry of Education,
Taiwan, under Contract 100W9633. Research was also sponsored in part by the
Army Research Laboratory and was accomplished under Cooperative Agreement
Number W911NF-10-2-0022. The views and the conclusions contained in this document
are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official policies,
either expressed or implied, of the Army Research Laboratory or the U.S Government.
The U.S Government is authorized to reproduce and distribute reprints for Government
purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation herein.
L.-D. Liao is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan and also with the Brain Research Center, National Chiao
Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.
C.-T. Lin is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, the Brain Research Center, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, and the CS/EE Departments, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: ctlin@mail.nctu.edu.tw).
K. McDowell is with the Translational Neuroscience Branch, Army Research
Laboratory, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21005 USA.
A. E. Wickenden is with the Sensors & Electron Devices Directorate, Army Research
Laboratory, Adelphi, MD 20783 USA.
K. Gramann and T.-P. Jung are with the Swartz Center for Computational
Neuroscience, Institute for Neural Computation, University of California at San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA.
L.-W. Ko is with the Brain Research Center, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan and also with Department of Biological Science and Technology, National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.
J.-Y. Chang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Chiao Tung
University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.

KEYWORDS | Augmented brain–computer interface (ABCI);
biosensor; cognitive-state monitoring; electroencephalogram

Digital Object Identifier: 10.1109/JPROC.2012.2184829

(EEG); human brain imaging

0018-9219/$31.00 Ó 2012 IEEE

and the desire to implement them in real-world applications
have led to the opportunity to develop augmented BCIs (ABCIs)
in the upcoming decades. An ABCI is similar to a BCI in that it
relies on biosensors that record signals from the brain in
everyday environments; the signals are then processed in real
time to monitor the behavior of the human. To use an ABCI as a
mobile brain imaging technique for everyday, real-life applications, the sensors and the corresponding device must be lightweight and the equipment response time must be short. This
study presents an overview of the wide range of biosensor
approaches currently being applied to ABCIs, from their use in
the laboratory to their application in clinical and everyday use.
The basic principles of each technique are described along with
examples of current applications of cutting-edge neuroscience
research. In summary, we show that ABCI techniques continue
to grow and evolve, incorporating new technologies and advances to address ever more complex and important neuroscience issues, with advancements that are envisioned to lead
to a wide range of real-life applications.

Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012 | Proceedings of the IEEE

1553

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

I. INTRODUCTION
As the proliferation of technology dramatically infiltrates
all aspects of social life, the development of strategies and
techniques to enhance human–computer interfaces is becoming increasingly important. Recent developments in
neurotechnologies are addressing these issues through
novel concepts that directly link brain activity to computers. Major forerunners in this area are brain–computer
interfaces (BCIs), which are based on a direct communication pathway between the human brain and an external
device and have been primarily applied in laboratory and
clinical settings. As biosensing technologies continue to
progress in the upcoming decades, the ability to image
brain activity will move away from traditional BCI settings
and into everyday environments. Such capabilities will
enable the development of potentially revolutionary approaches that will alter the nature of how people interact
with technology in their everyday environments through
novel augmented BCIs (ABCIs), which are BCIs that can
be used by individuals for everyday use.
Several existing imaging technologies are currently
used to sense brain activity for both basic research and
clinical applications, including functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) [1], positron emission tomography
(PET) [2], electroencephalograms (EEGs) and optical
brain imaging techniques (i.e., near-infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS) [3], laser speckle imaging [4], and functional
photo-acoustic imaging (fPAM) [5], [6]). fMRI offers multiparametric and noninvasive measurements of blood oxygenation [7], blood flow [8], and oxygen metabolism,
making this approach especially useful in imaging the
brain, muscles, the heart, and cancers as compared with
other medical imaging techniques, such as computed
tomography (CT) or X-rays [1], [9]. The PET imaging
technique is most useful in combination with anatomical
imaging methods, such as CT. Modern PET scanners are
now available with integrated high-end multidetector-row
CT scanners, which can perform sequential scans during
the same session [2]. These imaging techniques are powerful tools for human brain imaging; however, the
machines used for these techniques are bulky and thus
difficult to use for measuring human brain activity in reallife applications [3]. In contrast, the machines used for
optical brain-imaging techniques are relatively smaller and
are capable of assessing hemodynamic changes associated
with brain activity [5], [6]; however, the reconstructed
images from NIR suffer from poor spatial resolution due to
the diffusive nature of light in biological tissue [10]–[12]. A
magnetic or optically based system for measuring brain
activity in everyday applications remains to be discovered.
Of all the current imaging modalities, EEG offers the
most near-term potential for applications in everyday environments. EEG is a powerful technique that can provide
high temporal resolution to directly reflect the dynamics of
brain activity [13], [14] and has been widely used for both
1554

Proceedings of the IEEE | Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012

medical diagnoses and neurobiological research [15]–[19].
EEG-based BCI techniques acquire, process, and then
translate signals from brain activity into machine codes or
commands to provide a direct communication pathway
between the brain and the external world [18], [20], [21].
The acquisition of brain activity by EEG-based BCIs can be
divided into two categories [21]: invasive [22], [23] and
noninvasive [24], [25]. Invasive BCIs use sensors inside
the human/animal brain to obtain high-quality brainactivity signals or to send external signals into the brain
[22]. Invasive systems provide a reliable manner for connecting neurons and devices based on appropriate surgical
techniques; however, the relative increase in signal quality
as compared with scalp-based sensors has been disputed [26].
Furthermore, for everyday applications in healthy populations, any potential benefit based on increased signal
quality must be balanced against the potential risks associated with both the surgery and the long-term implantation of these devices.
Noninvasive EEG-based BCIs, which measure the electrical activity of the brain using electrodes placed along the
scalp skin, have been shown to provide a feasible method
for communication of the human brain with external
devices [27]–[29]. As compared with other mobile imaging
approaches, the usability and strong reliability of these
noninvasive devices, which are worn on the outside of the
head and are removable, have made the use of EEG signals
the most common approach for BCIs [30]. In recent years,
EEG sensors and sensing circuit designs have enabled the
integration of sensors into portable multimodal acquisition
devices to measure a wide variety of physiological signals.
Conventional wet Ag/AgCl electrodes are most frequently
used to measure EEG signals [19]. The characteristics of
conventional wet electrodes, including their applications
[31], have been widely studied and discussed in detail.
With proper skin preparation and the use of conductive
gels, the quality of the EEG signal measured by wet electrodes is excellent. However, the use of wet electrodes,
which require an extended setup and preparation time and
are based on an electrolyte being applied to the user’s hair,
greatly limit the applicability of BCIs for everyday use.
Recent efforts in sensing technologies have shown progress in the development of dry sensors that have the potential to dramatically improve system usability [32]–[34].
This progress coupled with advancements in signal processing techniques is enabling mobile brain imaging and
novel BCIconcepts that will influence many aspects of
everyday life and a broad population of users. At the current pace of research, the development of new EEG-based
ABCI devices with novel, highly usable, comfortable, robust and noninvasive sensors for everyday applications is
expected in the upcoming decades.
In this paper, we review a variety of biosensing
techniques and ABCI approaches that are based on the
associated devices. The basic principles of each technique
are summarized, and examples of their use in cognitive

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

applications are also provided. Makeig et al. [35] and
Lance et al. [36] have conducted a thorough review of the
advances in signal processing and ABCI applications.
Developments in biosensors for ABCI applications are
described in Section II. Section III discusses the recent
development of a noninvasive biosensing device for human
brain imaging and an advanced device for mobile brain
imaging in everyday applications. Finally, in Section IV, we
briefly discuss the expected trends for ABCI applications in
the upcoming decades.

II . THE DEVELOPMENT OF B IOSENSING
TECHNIQUES FOR ABCI APPLICATIONS
A. Wet Sensors
Conventional wet electrodes are the most frequently
used sensors for measuring EEG signals. Many types of wet
electrodes are available, and their individual characteristics
and clinical applications have been widely studied and
discussed in detail [31], [37], [38]. The various types include the following: 1) disposable electrodes (pre-gelled
types); 2) reusable disc electrodes (gold, silver, stainless
steel or tin); 3) saline-based electrodes; and 4) needle
electrodes. For noninvasive multichannel measurements,
electrode caps are preferred, which are placed on the surface of the user’s scalp. The most common wet electrodes
are coated with Ag–AgCl and have a diameter of 1 to 3 mm
with long, flexible leads that can be easily plugged into the
readout circuit device. Ag–AgCl electrodes can accurately
record small potential changes over relatively short durations [39]. In contrast, needle electrodes are preferred for
long recordings and are invasively inserted under the scalp.
The development of effective and comfortable EEG
sensors for everyday use requires the consideration of several factors, including 1) the ability to acquire high-quality
signals from a wide range of individuals with different
head shapes and sizes, hair types and lengths, and scalp
properties (e.g., scalp toughening due to ultraviolet light
exposure of balding areas or different chemical or soap
residues associated with hygiene practices); 2) longduration inter-application sensor stability, sensor attachment, and user comfort issues; 3) the effects of long-term
use (multiple acquisitions) on sensor stability/durability
and the head/scalp; and 4) other practical considerations
such as simplicity of application and cost. Additionally, the
type and design of the electrode can have a significant
impact on artifact signals (see [37] for a discussion on the
developments in signal processing and machine-learning
algorithms).
Novel Wet Approaches: Recently, Alba et al. explored the
benefits of a cross-linked polyacrylate gel at the electrode/
skin interface. As a superabsorbent hydrogel, polyacrylate
can absorb an electrolyte solution and swell to a degree far
beyond typical contemporary electrode materials, provid-

Fig. 1. Several types of EEG sensors: (a) wet sensors; (b) water-based
EEG sensors proposed by Volosyak et al. [42]; (c)–(g) dry EEG sensors
developed by Yu et al. [46], Liao et al. [34], Matthews et al. [54],
Grozea et al. [56], and Liao et al. [33]; and (h) noncontact EEG sensors.

ing a strong hydrating effect to the skin surface [40]. This
hydrating power allows the material to increase the
effective skin contact surface area through wetting and
noninvasively decreasing or bypassing the highly resistive
barrier of the stratum corneum. Cross-linked sodium polyacrylate gel was synthesized using a method proposed by
Sohn et al. [41]. The dimension of the polyacrylate gel
electrode is illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The development of
water-based sensors for EEG-based BCI applications was
studied by Volosyak et al. [42] [see Fig. 1(b)]. This group
has shown that water-based sensors can measure EEG
activity using tap water as the interface to the scalp. However, movement artifacts, primarily influenced by the
shape of the electrode, remain one of the major problems
with such electrodes. This group has also concluded that
optimal designs of the electrode and the electrode materials for maintaining low impedance still require future
improvement.

B. Dry Biosensors
With proper skin preparation and the use of conductive
gels, the EEG signal quality from wet sensors is excellent
[19]. However, the skin preparation processes used to
reduce the skin-electrode contact interface impedance can
be time-consuming and uncomfortable for the user [43],
making them impractical for everyday use. Furthermore,
as the EEG signal quality may degrade over time as the skin
regenerates and/or the conductive gel dries [43], these
electrodes require repeated skin preparations and gel applications, which may also cause allergic reactions or infections. Issues also arise when measuring a location of
interest that is covered with hair, which can lead to insufficient skin-electrode contact area, especially for long-term
applications.
To overcome these problems, dry-contact- and noncontact-type EEG sensors have been developed to improve
EEG measurements [31], [44]–[46]. Dry contact sensors
Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012 | Proceedings of the IEEE

1555

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

can be separated into the following types: 1) dry microelectromechanical system (MEMS) sensors [see Fig. 1(c)];
2) dry fabric-based sensors [see Fig. 1(d)]; 3) hybrid dry
sensors [see Fig. 1(e)–(g)]. Dry MEMS EEG sensors use
Bmicroneedles[ to reach the skin to acquire the EEG signals without the use of conductive gels on the forehead or
at other hairless sites [45]. The characteristics of dry
MEMS EEG sensors have been discussed in detail [47],
including the dependency of the electrode-skin-electrode
impedance (ESEI) on electrode size [47]. However, depending on their design, these sensors can be slightly invasive as the electrodes (microneedles) penetrate the stratum

corneum and sometimes live skin layers, possibly resulting
in pain or infection. These dry MEMS sensors can perform
well in measuring EEG signals when applied to the
forehead or other hairless sites; however, evidence
regarding the quality of the EEG signals at sites covered
with hair using dry MEMS-based EEG sensors is less
convincing.
Recently, fabric-based sensors were proposed for measuring biopotential signals [48]–[52]. Beckmann et al. have
conducted detailed investigations of the characterization
of fabric materials with different fabric specifications for
electrocardiography (ECG) measurements [51]. Baek et al.

Fig. 2. (a) Photograph of a participant wearing a 256-channel EEG cap with motion capture emitters placed on the cap and along standard
positions in a full-body motion capture suit; the same participant seen from behind wearing a backpack containing the EEG amplifier system.
(b) Spontaneous EEG activity recorded for selected channels (as indicated on the figure’s head to the right), showing single-channel
activity during several stride cycles and (below) vertical center-of-mass displacement during the gait cycle. The gait cycle begins and ends
with the left toe raised (red vertical lines). The other vertical lines indicate the timing of the left heel strike (black vertical lines), the right toe lift
(blue vertical lines), and the right heel strike (green vertical lines). (c) Centroids of independent component (IC) clusters (colored spheres)
visualized in the Montreal Neurological Institute brain volume in horizontal, sagittal, and coronal views. The gray and yellow spheres represent
eye and neck muscle activity clusters, respectively. The spheres of other colors mark the centroids of brain IC clusters. (d) Grand-mean
event-related potential (ERP) envelopes (maximum and minimum channel ERP values for each latency) time-locked to target stimulus onset
for two different movement conditions. The light gray shaded area shows the summed back-projection of all IC clusters. The purple shaded area
shows the back-projected contribution of the IC cluster with equivalent dipoles in or near the anterior cingulate cortex [19 in (d)]. The yellow and
dark gray traces show the back-projected contribution of a representative neck muscle cluster [16 in (d)] and a representative eye movement
cluster [6 in (d)], respectively.

1556

Proceedings of the IEEE | Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

Fig. 3. Wearable EEG devices: (a) Emotiv, (b) NeuroSky, (c) Zeo,
(d) StarLab, (e) EmSense, (f) nia Game Controller, (g) Mindo 4 with
dry foam electrodes, and (h) Mindo 16 with dry spring-loaded
probe sensors.

fabricated a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-based dry electrode for long-term ECG measurements [50]. Both studies
indicate that long-term biopotential signal monitoring is
possible using fabric-based electrodes [48]. The test results
also indicate that the performance of fabric-based electrodes is comparable to that of commercial Ag/AgCl electrodes
for ECG applications. More recently, Lin et al. developed
foam-based sensors wrapped in conductive fabric materials
to acquire forehead EEG signals [34] [see Fig. 1(d)]. They
also showed that the foam-based sensors have the potential
to reduce motion artifacts when obtaining measurements
from a freely moving user using conventional wet
electrodes. Compared with dry MEMS-based EEG sensors,
fabric-based sensors are relatively comfortable and noninvasive. However, fabric-based sensors for acquiring EEG
signals at sites covered with hair require further improvement because the contact area of the skin-electrode
interface is significantly reduced by the presence of hair.
In addition to the previously described types of dry
sensors, Matthews et al. proposed a hybrid dry sensor for
EEG measurements [53]–[55] [see Fig. 1(e)]. This sensor,
which combines high-impedance resistive and capacitive
characteristics, contacts the scalp surface without any skin
preparation and is dependent on the high contact impedance between the scalp and the electrode. However, these
sensors possess hard substrates, which led to discomfort or
even pain on the scalp surface when force was applied for
attachment. The hard substrate also led to EEG signal distortions caused by motion effects [31]. Moreover, the
fabrication cost for a high contact impedance electrode
may be higher than for other types of dry EEG electrodes,
such as fabric-based electrodes. In response to this concern, Cristian et al. presented a new, low-cost dry EEG
sensor made of flexible metal-coated polymer bristles [56]
[see Fig. 1(f)]. They suggested that the dry bristle sensors
produce high-quality EEG recordings and are thus suitable
for a wide range of EEG studies and BCI applications.
Moreover, Liao et al. proposed a novel dry spring-loaded

contact probe EEG sensor for measuring EEG signals, especially at sites covered with hair [33] [see Fig. 1(g)]. Each
of the spring-loaded probes is used to attach the sensors
tightly to the scalp surface. These probes were designed to
be inserted into a thin plate for additional conductivity.
Most importantly, this thin plate is flexible so that it will fit
the scalp surface well when applying force to the sensor.
The spring-loaded probes and thin plate serve as a buffer to
avoid causing pain when force is applied to the sensor and
to improve the skin-electrode contact impedance. An injection molding process is used to package the sensors,
which can decrease the fabrication cost of the entire
acquisition system, depending on the cost of the electrodes. Test results have demonstrated the feasibility of using
dry spring-loaded probe electrodes for measuring EEG
signals at sites covered with hair.
Noncontact (capacitive) sensors with spaces between
the electrode and the body and without skin preparation
also have the potential to acquire EEG signals [57] [see
Fig. 1(h)]. However, dry capacitive sensors are sensitive to
motion artifacts [31], and Gert et al. indicated that designing an amplifier to acquire signals with such high source
impedance remains a challenging issue [31]. Because of
these issues, dry capacitive sensors require further
improvement.

C. Nano- and Microtechnology Sensors
Nanoelectronic device technology holds promise for
the next generation of electronics, leading to advancement
through the development of novel sensors, flexible, transparent, and wearable high-performance electronics, smart
bandages, optoelectronics, on-chip electronic-optical coupling, radiation hard electronics, and communications and
processing electronics for deployable sensor platforms. For
example, researchers in Spain and the United Kingdom
have developed a new method for measuring electrical
activity in the brain that uses sensors constructed from
carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [58]. Ruffini et al. also demonstrated the use of carbon-nanotube-based dry sensors in
biopotential signal studies [44], [58]. In the future, active,
short-range communication of information between bodyworn sensors may be enabled by spin-torque nanooscillators (STNOs). These devices are being actively
studied as a technology for magnetic memory applications,
and may also be used as miniature frequency-agile radio
frequency (RF) sources and sensitive magnetic field detectors [59]. For example, the extremely low-power (250 pW)
transmission of microwave radiation through air has been
demonstrated from a discrete 50-nm device, with broadband frequency agility over at least four octaves of frequency without conjugate matching [60], enabling a new
class of low-power wireless communications for wearable
sensor technologies. Bio-inspired nanotechnologies mimicking gecko foot structures are being developed as
engineered reversible adhesive devices to enable mm- to
cm-scale robotic platforms to crawl on surfaces [61] and
Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012 | Proceedings of the IEEE

1557

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

may be applicable to future biocompatible dry electrode
adhesives for EEG sensors. Maturing micro- and nanoelectromechanical system (MEMS/NEMS) technologies
also hold promise for novel actuation devices, tactors and
state-measurement devices. In the future, carbon-based or
other biocompatible nanoscale sensing technologies may
be envisioned that could be injected into blood vessels,
cross the blood-brain barrier, attach to specific neurons or
cells, sense the desired signals and transmit to an external
receiver though the intact skull. While a very high spatialtemporal resolution of the EEG signals could potentially be
provided in this manner, the resolution of many significant
technical and ethical considerations will be required to
facilitate the use of such technologies, similar to the existing drug-development protocols.

D. Multimodality Sensors
In addition to those sensors that are only used to
measure EEG signals, the simultaneous recording of hemodynamic responses using NIRS and neural activity using
EEG through multimodality sensors while users receive
stimulation is also a critical issue in the neuroscience domain. NIRS and EEG techniques are based upon different
imaging principles, and therefore, cross-validation can
improve our understanding of both the relationship between hemodynamic responses and neural activity underlying cortical activation and the biophysics behind the
measurement techniques themselves. Furthermore and
critical to ABCIs, simultaneous NIRS and EEG imaging can
provide novel insight into the phenomenon of neurovascular coupling changes for studying human brain mapping
in everyday environments. Takeuchi et al. developed a
head cap for both NIRS and EEG whole-brain imaging
[62], and neurohemodynamic changes have been addressed in detail. Cooper et al. also proposed a novel probe
design for simultaneous EEG and NIRS imaging of cortical
activation in the human brain [63]. To accomplish this
imaging, an Bopto-electrode probe[ was designed to house
both an EEG electrode and an optical fiber bundle. This
probe illustrates the potential applications of simultaneous
NIR and EEG imaging. Although such novel ABCIs could
provide simultaneous EEG and NIRS imaging, conductive
gels and proper skin preparation are still required on the
scalp skin surface at the electrode sites. In the future, we
envision that dry EEG sensors will be integrated into
simultaneous EEG and NIRS imaging.

III . INTEGRATION OF B IOSENSORS AND
SE N SI N G DEVI CE S INT O A B C I S Y ST E M S
A. Current Developments in Biosensing
Device Technology
Basic System Design: Traditionally, EEG systems have
used relatively bulky, wired laboratory or clinically
1558

Proceedings of the IEEE | Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012

oriented equipment to measure EEG signals. Analog EEG
signals are directly transmitted to a sensing device through
wires that limit the routine activity of users. Recently,
small wearable EEG acquisition devices have become
available that are capable of recording EEG signals without
hindering the user in the performance of routine tasks in
everyday operational environments (for a detailed overview of wearable EEG-based BCI technology, refer to [64],
[65]). Wearable EEG systems have been developed using
headbands [66]–[68], headphones [69], caps [70], helmets
[55], headsets [71], [72] and even cat ears [73]. Their shape
determines the potential positions of the electrodes, which
limits their functionality; however, the design of wearable
EEG devices must consider both functionality and
appearance. For example, a forehead-based system would
not effectively utilize evoked potentials from the visual
cortex, which are typically measured from electrodes
located on the posterior portion of the head.
Analog Front-End: An instrumentation amplifier is used
to augment the small signals received from electrodes and
requires careful design to achieve a high signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). The common-mode rejection ratio (CMRR) is
usually used to evaluate amplifier instruments, i.e., an
amplifier with a higher CMRR reduces the common-mode
noise in measurements. The traditional implementation of
amplifiers uses a three op-amp configuration, which requires precise matching of the resistors used in the feedback network to achieve a high CMRR. Such matching
usually requires expensive laser-trimmed resistors that
consume a significant amount of chip area. One technique
for overcoming this problem is to use current feedback
instrumentation amplifiers [74]–[76], which requires two
resistors to adjust the gain, but the resistors are not required to be matched. The advantage of a current feedback
instrumentation amplifier is that it could be implemented
using CMOS techniques and could reduce the chip area
due to a lower resistor count, which is critical for amplifier
miniaturization.
During the acquisition of EEG signals, which contain
low frequencies, flicker noise (1/f noise) and inputreferred dc offsets are undesirable signals that must be
suppressed to achieve a high SNR. Flicker noises are
signals in which the spectrum is inversely proportional to
the noise. Input-referred dc offsets are caused by electrode
polarization. Depending on the electrode placement, these
dc offsets can be large and can easily saturate high-gain
instrumentation amplifiers. Chopper amplifiers are commonly used for reducing the noise associated with op-amp
imperfections and input-referred dc offset voltage. This
modulation transposes the signal to the odd harmonic
frequencies of the chopper frequency. After modulation,
the signals are amplified and demodulated back to the
original frequency band. The input offset voltage and noise
are demodulated to the higher harmonics of the chopper
frequency in the second multiplier. Another technique for

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

Table 1 Comparison of Wireless BCI Systems

reducing input-referred dc offsets is autozeroing. Autozeroing amplifiers typically operate in one of two phases:
the sampling phase or the output phase. Autozeroing can
meet low-offset requirements but may not be suitable for
low-power applications [77] because it requires the offset
to be stored on a capacitor that may be relatively large and
may thus increase power consumption. This issue should
be resolved before it is used in EEG-monitoring applications. In [78], the authors apply autozeroing to an
instrument amplifier and use a low-pass filter for noisecancelling feedback.
Transmission Medium: EEG acquisition devices are
usually designed for low-power consumption and low
cost. The acquired signals are transmitted to another device
with a high-end processor through a transmission medium.
Currently, most projects use conventional wireless technology such as Bluetooth [66]–[68], 802.15.4/Zigbees [70],
or RF transmitters [55], [69], [71], [72]. Bluetooth was
developed as a replacement for cables and is a common
feature in laptops and cellular phones. However, it also has
a heavy protocol stack and high power consumption. In
contrast, the protocol stacks of RF transmitters and 820.15.4/
Zigbees are light and more efficient in terms of their
power use, but they are less common in laptops.
Multichannel EEG transmission should have a high
data rate and high power consumption. Compression technology can be used to reduce the data rate. Lossless compression schemes are reliable but have lower compression
ratios [79], [80]. Lossy compression schemes [81], [82]
have high compression ratios but introduce artifact issues.

Table 1 summarizes the EEG acquisition devices mentioned above [55], [66]–[71], which are responsible for
wirelessly acquiring EEG signals and transmission data.
Signal processing requires high computation power and is
handled by hosts such as computers and cellular phones.
Therefore, acquisition devices could be implemented with
low-cost microcontrollers. Microcontrollers acquire digitized EEG signals from an ADC through a serial interface.
According to the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem, the
sampling rate should be greater than twice the maximum
frequency of the acquired EEG signals. For example,
SSVEP signals with a maximum frequency of 50 Hz are
acquired, using a sampling rate of 128 Hz. A higher sampling rate and a higher resolution provide better accuracy
for EEG signals but also increase the data rate and power
consumption.

B. Technologies That Will Change Future
Biosensing Techniques for ABCIs
Miniaturization of Power Sources: The miniaturization of
power sources will enable the development of lightweight,
portable sensor technologies. Li-ion battery technology, in
which the energy density is proportional to the voltage of
the cell, is being advanced through the development of
high-voltage cathodes and electrolytes capable of operating
at those higher voltages. Researchers at the U.S. Army
Research Laboratory (ARL) have developed breakthrough
electrolytes that allow for the operation of high-voltage
lithium-nickel-manganese spinel oxides at 4.7 V against
Li with 99% Coulombic efficiency and 85% capacity
Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012 | Proceedings of the IEEE

1559

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

retention after 200 cycles [83]. ARL researchers have also
developed a stabilized 4.8-V lithium-cobalt-phosphate
high-voltage cathode. Such a stabilized cathode can be
cycled against Li with only 12% capacity loss compared
with 33% capacity loss for the same cathode without stabilization after 10 cycles. This increased capacity retention
has not been previously achieved [84]. Power sources
using energetic materials based on nuclear isomers are
being investigated for future power generation. Radioisotopes possess intrinsic energy storage that is more than
100 times greater than that of fuel cells and batteries, and
they have the potential ability to release that energy upon
demand. Recent results have demonstrated an induced
energy release from isomers using neutrons [85], and
alpha-based isotope batteries are being studied as a longlived power source with an anticipated 50-year lifetime
[86], which exceeds current battery lifetimes. Power conversion systems are being investigated at the cubicmillimeter, milligram scale to create high-efficiency,
high-power-density actuation systems. CMOS design techniques, such as specific guard-rings and floating wells, that
enable on-chip handling of more than 20 V in a 130-nm
1.2-V CMOS process have been demonstrated [85] and
represent a significant step towards the high voltages required for novel actuators. MEMS-based ultraminiature
air-core inductors with high-quality (Q) factors ðQ > 20Þ
and inductance densities ð> 100 nanohenries/mm2 Þ have
been shown to outperform most inductors fabricated with
thin magnetic films, forming the basis for high-efficiency,
high-frequency (> 20 MHz) boost converters [88]. Novel
techniques using capillary wicking are being used to shape
magnetic or high-k dielectric nanoparticles into complex
3-D microstructures [89], resulting in power conversion
device components that show significant improvements in
capacitance or inductance with no parasitic effect on the
quality factor (i.e., efficiency) up to 200 MHz. Nanoelectronic devices are also being explored, including supercapacitors for energy storage [90] and graphene-based
metal-insulator-metal (MIM) diode structures for harvesting energy and rectifying antenna structures.
The design of power-efficient control theory is another
approach to achieving reduced power requirements for
sensor array information processing. Bio-inspired and bioplausible control theory, in which the control laws could,
in principle, be implemented on the neural substrate of
simple insects, is being investigated for applications in
which computational power is extremely limited. Research
groups, such as Richard Murray’s group at Caltech, are
developing control theories that focus on tight coupling
between the temporal dynamics of the system and the
temporal properties of the control algorithm [91]. These
bioplausible algorithms use approaches that involve
parallel, asynchronous information processing and emerging circuit technologies, such as those being developed in
the DARPA-sponsored SyNAPSE (Systems of Neuromorphic Adaptive Plastic Scalable Electronics) project. These
1560

Proceedings of the IEEE | Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012

technologies could, for example, facilitate the fusion of
inputs from different sensor modes that have distinctly
different time constants, such as EEG and fMRI, enhancing localization of the brain response for improved BCI
interactions.
Mobile Human Brain Imaging for Real-Life Applications:
Traditional neuroscientific approaches to measuring and
imaging the hemodynamics coupled to neural activity that
accompany cognitive processing (e.g., fMRI, PET) permit
only minimal movement of the participants’ hands or feet.
This restriction of the participants’ movement range is
necessary to avoid movement of the signal-generating
volume, i.e., the participants’ brain, which cannot be followed by the heavy sensor arrays [92]. In addition, brain
imaging techniques that directly measure electrical activity
originating from the neural populations underlying cognitive processing further restrict the movement of the
participants’ head and eyes to avoid contamination of the
signal of interest with current source activity originating
from the neck, supracranial, and facial muscles as well as
strong current source activity stemming from horizontal
and vertical eye movement. From the standpoint of embodied cognition, however, cognitive processes are tightly
coupled to physical activity and make use of our physical
structure to reach behavioral goals [92], [93].
Consequently, results from traditional imaging approaches can only explain the neural basis of cognitive
processes that are restricted to specific recording environments and do not necessarily reflect natural cognitive
processing. Thus far, no investigation has compared human brain dynamics during free movement in the world
with the brain dynamics of restricted behavior during
traditional laboratory experiments. New results from animals in motion, however, demonstrate a direct coupling of
behavioral states with brain states [94], [95]. These studies
support the assumption that changes in behavioral states
are accompanied by changes in brain dynamic states to
adapt to differences in incoming sensory information.
While the restrictions of traditional brain imaging approaches do not invalidate theoretical views formed on the
basis of such experiments, several recent investigations in
human participants point to a tight coupling of motor
behavior and, for example, attention and spatial cognition.
An example of such coupling was described by Wykotska
and colleagues [96], demonstrating a direct influence of
(planned) movement on target detection when targets
were defined by features relevant to the movement. The
authors showed that shape-defined targets were detected
faster when participants planned to grasp a target object
while luminance-defined targets were detected faster
when participants planned on pointing towards the target
object. An even more pronounced coupling of active behavior with human brain dynamics could be expected for
spatial cognitive processes that are tightly coupled to and
make efficient use of idiothetic information derived from

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

the vestibular and proprioceptive system [97]. Spatial updating of one’s own position and orientation is a prerequisite of successful spatial orientation but relies heavily
on idiothetic information that is absent in traditional brain
imaging approaches. As a consequence, the brain dynamics
accompanying active spatial orientation including physical
rotation will provide novel insights into the brain dynamics
associated with idiothetic information processing and will
thus help us better understand the brain dynamics associated with spatial orientation. To overcome the restrictions of traditional imaging approaches and to investigate
the brain dynamics accompanying active behavior in humans, our group, recently developed and demonstrated a
mobile brain/body imaging (MoBI) approach [91],
[98]–[100]. Through various experiments, we demonstrated the feasibility of this concept and revealed interesting
insights into the cognitive dynamics of attention during
treadmill walking [98] and into the coupling of cortical
activity with gait-cycle phases [100]. However, these
experiments were clearly restricted because of the hardwiring of the EEG system. In [99], the analysis of human
brain dynamics for subjects who were standing and walking
at different speeds was demonstrated. However, the cable
sway associated with the displacement of the participants’
heads while running required extensive template-based
artifact rejection (see Fig. 2). In another experiment
[Gramann et al., unpublished manuscript], the use of
traditional hard-wired EEG sensors restricted the movement
range of the participants’ heads when they attempted to
actively orient towards laterally placed objects in their
environment. In general, in the field of motor control and
physical behavior, numerous attempts to study active
cognitive processing have been hampered due to these types
of issues associated with the tethered nature of standard EEG
equipment. Classic examples include EEG studies of shooting
that have been largely limited to static targets as opposed to
reactive, dynamic targets; studies of golf that have been
largely limited to putting as opposed to driving and studies of
basketball that have been limited to free-throw shooting as
opposed to any other aspect of game-play. These examples
demonstrate the need for wireless sensor systems to allow for
future investigation and deeper insights into the architecture
of active and mobile cognition.
Advanced Flexible Electronics and Display Technologies:
Future ABCIs are envisioned to be moving towards seamless integration with users’ clothing and the environment;
advancements in technologies such as flexible electronics
and displays, which are maturing to provide lightweight,
rugged, and ultralow-power flexible imaging systems for
high-yield manufacturing processes, will enable such improvements [see, for example, http://flexdisplay.asu.edu/].
Full-color organic light-emitting-diode (OLED) displays
have been demonstrated on plastic substrates, and chargetransfer complex molecular OLED systems have been
integrated into emissive flexible displays to dramatically

enhance the charge injection and transport properties of
organic devices [100]. Flexible reflective displays for
system-level integration have transitioned in industry to
meet emerging information technology needs for the
mobile soldier. Large-area distributions of flexible electronic circuits, discrete elements, and sensors are being integrated with flexible solar cells, antennas, and solid-state
lighting to enhance next-generation displays. Enhancements in carrier transport, brightness, and speed are being
investigated with the use of flexible and stretchable silicon
or metal technologies [102]. These technologies will enable
the creation of high-performance conformable circuits that
are needed for more seamless integration of ABCIs into
clothing as well as advanced concepts for smart clothes and
body armor. Stretchable silicon-integrated circuits that can
be applied directly to the skin have recently been demonstrated [103]. These tattoo-like structures are an example of
the new epidermal electronics technology that can be used
to directly measure vital signs. Such advancements will
permit a range of advancements from novel approaches to
sensor design to the collection and integration of highdensity signals across numerous behavioral and physiological sources for enhanced ABCI performance.

IV. T R E N DS I N A B CI s
A. Current Applications of ABCIs
Wet electrodes have their own readout circuit systems and are reliable for clinical applications. For dry/
noncontact electrodes, developing the proper readout device for everyday use is important. Devices with dry electrodes are more convenient and comfortable than
traditional EEG systems with wet electrodes [31] and are,
thus, more practical for use in everyday applications.
Although dry/noncontact EEG devices have not been proposed or used for clinical applications, many commercial
devices use EEG measurements for entertainment (Neurosky, Emotiv, StarLab, EmSense, and nia Game Controller) [104], [105] and for monitoring personal sleeping
status (MyZeo) [106], as shown in Fig. 3(a)–(f). These
figures demonstrate that the development of portable EEG
devices with dry electrodes has become an important goal
for mobile human brain imaging.
Recently, Lin et al. proposed a wearable, wireless EEG
device (Mindo) for everyday use [32]. The Mindo 4 EEG
device with 4-channel foam electrodes has proven to be
reliable for controlling games according to the user’s mental
focusing state based on signals from forehead sensor sites
[34], as shown in Fig. 3(g). It also has the potential to acquire
the EEG status during sleep. Another multichannel EEG
device, Mindo 16, which has spring-loaded probe electrodes,
was designed by Lin et al. for wirelessly measuring EEG
signals, especially at sites with hair, as the corresponding dry
sensors have the potential to properly reach the scalp skin
through the hair [see Fig. 3(h)]. In addition to wireless EEG
Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012 | Proceedings of the IEEE

1561

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

devices with dry contact electrodes, Gert et al. designed a
wireless device with non-contact electrodes for measuring
both EEG and ECG [107]. There is no doubt that developing a
truly wearable, wireless EEG device using dry/noncontact
electrodes and extending the limitations of this technique
from basic research to clinical applications are important
goals. Highly desirable characteristics of future devices
include a minimized readout circuit size and easy preparation when using dry electrodes.

B. Future ABCI Applications Based on Advanced
Biosensing Technology
Gaming control, homecare, and rehabilitation engineering applications are potential future applications of
ABCIs in the coming decades. ABCI applications for gaming are one of the major focuses of this technology, and
existing prototypes demonstrate the feasibility of games
controlled by an ABCI [40]–[42]. It is possible that an EEGbased BCI device with novel EEG sensors that is capable of
interpreting the cognitive relevance of neuron interactions
in the brain will become available and reliable in the near
future [108]. Another feasible future trend for ABCIs is
remote monitoring, which can be used in homecare and
rehabilitation engineering applications [109]. The elderly
and ill often prefer living in their own houses to being in a
hospital, but living alone can be dangerous because of
unpredictable accidents such as falling and epileptic
seizures [110]. Remote-sensing and monitoring would
enable the remote monitoring of a user’s EEG signals.
EEG-based ABCIs may be able to assist with depression and
many other psychological and cranial nerve diseases, such
as schizophrenia, Parkinson’s disease and seizures, in the
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-Y. I. Shih, C.-C. V. Chen, B.-C. Shyu,
Z.-J. Lin, Y.-C. Chiang, F.-S. Jaw, Y.-Y. Chen,
and C. Chang, BA new scenario for
negative functional magnetic resonance
imaging signals: Endogenous neurotransmission,[ J. Neurosci., vol. 29,
pp. 3036–3044, 2009.
[2] Y.-Y. Chen, Y.-Y. I. Shih, Y.-C. Lo,
P.-L. Lu, S. Tsang, F.-S. Jaw, and
R.-S. Liu, BMicroPET imaging of
noxious thermal stimuli in the
conscious rat brain,[ Somatosens.
Motor Res., vol. 27, pp. 69–81,
2010, 2011/04/13.
[3] E. M. C. Hillman, BOptical brain
imaging in vivo: Techniques and
applications from animal to man,[
J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 12,
pp. 051402–051428, 2007.
[4] N. Li, X. Jia, K. Murari, R. Parlapalli,
A. Rege, and N. V. Thakor, BHigh
spatiotemporal resolution imaging of
the neurovascular response to electrical
stimulation of rat peripheral trigeminal
nerve as revealed by in vivo temporal laser
speckle contrast,[ J. Neurosci. Methods,
vol. 176, pp. 230–236, 2009.
[5] L.-D. Liao, Y.-Y. Chen, C.-T. Lin, J.-Y. Chang,
and M.-L. Li, BFunctional transcranial
photoacoustic micro-imaging of mouse
cerebrovascular cross-section and

1562

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

near future. We refer the reader to another paper written
by Lance et al. [36] for details of future ABCI applications.

V. SUMMARY
We have studied a wide range of approaches to ABCIs and
explored their applications to neuroscientific questions
and cognitive engineering. We have provided insights into
the fundamental basis of many ABCI techniques and
highlighted important considerations for their practical
implementation. The miniaturization of sensors, electronics, and power sources; the design of power-efficient
information processing; and the emergence of flexible
electronics and display technologies have the potential to
radically enhance future ABCI capabilities. We hope that
these details will help those who are interested in using or
developing biosensing techniques for ABCIs to understand
the key aspects that should be considered when acquiring
measurements or analyzing data.
We have surveyed the large body of literature that
discusses studies in which biosensing technologies and
devices have been successfully used for ground-breaking
and important research on ABCIs and their applications.
The development of ABCIs is a rapidly expanding field that
is continually evolving to embrace new technologies and
real-life applications. h

Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank S.-Y. Li for his help in
discussing part of the context in this paper.

hemoglobin oxygenation changes during
forepaw electrical stimulation,[ in Proc.
Photons Plus Ultrasound: Imaging
and Sensing 2011, San Francisco, CA, 2011,
vol. 7899, pp. 78 992–78 997.
L.-D. Liao, M.-L. Li, H.-Y. Lai, Y.-Y. I. Shih,
Y.-C. Lo, S. Tsang, P. C.-P. Chao, C.-T. Lin,
F.-S. Jaw, and Y.-Y. Chen, BImaging brain
hemodynamic changes during rat forepaw
electrical stimulation using functional
photoacoustic microscopy,[ NeuroImage,
vol. 52, pp. 562–570, 2010.
S. Ogawa, D. W. Tank, R. Menon,
J. M. Ellermann, S. G. Kim, H. Merkle,
and K. Ugurbil, BIntrinsic signal changes
accompanying sensory stimulation:
Functional brain mapping with magnetic
resonance imaging,[ Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.,
vol. 89, pp. 5951–5955, 1992.
J. A. Detre, W. Zhang, D. A. Roberts,
A. C. Silva, D. S. Williams, D. J. Grandis,
A. P. Koretsky, and J. S. Leigh, BTissue
specific perfusion imaging using arterial
spin labeling,[ NMR Biomed, vol. 7,
pp. 75–82, Mar. 1994.
B. P. Chugh, J. P. Lerch, L. X. Yu,
M. Pienkowski, R. V. Harrison,
R. M. Henkelman, and J. G. Sled,
BMeasurement of cerebral blood
volume in mouse brain regions using
micro-computed tomography,[ NeuroImage,
vol. 47, pp. 1312–1318, 2009.

Proceedings of the IEEE | Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012

[10] H. Dehghani, S. Srinivasan, B. W. Pogue,
and A. Gibson, BNumerical modelling and
image reconstruction in diffuse optical
tomography,[ Philosoph. Trans. Royal
Soc. A: Math., Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 367,
pp. 3073–3093, 2009.
[11] L. V. Wang and H.-I. Wu, Biomedical Optics:
Principles and Imaging. New York: Wiley,
2007.
[12] G. Gratton and M. Fabiani, BDynamic
brain imaging: Event-related optical
signals (EROS) measures of the time
course and localization of cognitive-related
activity,[ Psychonom. Bull. Rev., vol. 5,
pp. 535–563, 1998.
[13] E. Moser, M. Meyerspeer,
F. P. S. Fischmeister, G. Grabner,
H. Bauer, and S. Trattnig, BWindows
on the human body in vivo high-field
magnetic resonance research and
applications in medicine and psychology,[
Sensors, vol. 10, pp. 5724–5757, 2010.
[14] A. Gevins, J. Le, N. K. Martin, P. Brickett,
J. Desmond, and B. Reutter, BHigh
resolution EEG: 124-channel recording,
spatial deblurring and MRI integration
methods,[ Electroencephalogr. Clin.
Neurophys., vol. 90, pp. 337–358, 1994.
[15] C.-T. Lin, R.-C. Wu, S.-F. Liang, W.-H. Chao,
Y.-J. Chen, and T.-P. Jung, BEEG-based
drowsiness estimation for safety driving
using independent component analysis,[

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Part I: Regular
Papers, vol. 52, pp. 2726–2738, 2005.
G. K. Wenning, I. Litvan, M. Verny,
K. Ray-Chaudhuri, R. Granata, W. Poewe,
and K. Jellinger, BIs EEG useful in the
differential diagnosis of Parkinsonism?[
Parkinsonism Rel. Disorders, vol. 4, pp. 79–80,
1998.
S. Sanders, S. Rowlinson, I. Manidakis,
C. D. Ferrie, and M. Koutroumanidis,
BThe contribution of the EEG technologists
in the diagnosis of Panayiotopoulos
syndrome (susceptibility to early onset
benign childhood autonomic seizures),[
Seizure, vol. 13, pp. 565–573, 2004.
N. Thakor, BIn the spotlight:
Neuroengineering,[ IEEE Rev.
Biomed. Eng., vol. 2, pp. 18–20,
2009.
N. V. Thakor, BBiopotentials and
electro-physiology measurement,[ in
The Measurement, Instrumentation, and
Sensors Handbook. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC, 1999, pp. 74–71.
S. G. Mason and G. E. Birch, BA general
framework for brain computer interface
design,[ IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehab.
Eng., vol. 11, pp. 70–85, 2003.
R. Rao and R. Scherer, BBrain-computer
interfacing [in the spotlight],[ IEEE
Signal Process. Mag., vol. 27, pp. 152–150,
2010.
Y.-Y. Chen, H.-Y. Lai, S.-H. Lin, C.-W. Cho,
W.-H. Chao, C.-H. Liao, S. Tsang, Y.-F. Chen,
and S.-Y. Lin, BDesign and fabrication
of a polyimide-based microelectrode array:
Application in neural recording and
repeatable electrolytic lesion in rat brain,[
J. Neurosci. Meth., vol. 182, pp. 6–16,
2009.
T. Yamakawa, T. Yamakawa, T. Inoue,
S. Aou, S. Ishizuka, M. Fujii, and M. Suzuki,
BMinimally invasive ecog recording
using the novel subdural electrodes
manipulated by a shape memory alloy
guidewire,[ Epilepsia, vol. 52, pp. 201–201,
Aug. 2011.
G. Xiaorong, X. Dingfeng, C. Ming, and
G. Shangkai, BA BCI-based environmental
controller for the motion-disabled,[ IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehab. Eng., vol. 11,
pp. 137–140, 2003.
A. S. Royer, A. J. Doud, M. L. Rose, and
B. He, BEEG control of a virtual helicopter
in 3-dimensional space using intelligent
control strategies,[ IEEE Trans. Neural
Syst. Rehab. Eng., vol. 18, pp. 581–589,
2010.
J. R. Wolpaw, BBrain-computer interfaces
as new brain output pathways,[ J.
Physiol.-London, vol. 579, pp. 613–619,
Mar. 15, 2007.
A. Nijholt and D. Tan, BBrain-computer
interfacing for intelligent systems,[ IEEE
Intell. Syst., vol. 23, pp. 72–79, 2008.
K. D. Nielsen, A. F. Cabrera, and
N. Omar Feix Do, BEEG based BCI-towards
a better control. Brain-computer interface
research at aalborg university,[ IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehab. Eng., vol. 14,
pp. 202–204, 2006.
G. R. Muller-Putz, R. Scherer, C. Neuper,
and G. Pfurtscheller, BSteady-state
somatosensory evoked potentials:
Suitable brain signals for brain-computer
interfaces?[ IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehab. Eng., vol. 14, pp. 30–37, 2006.
S. Mason, M. Jackson, and G. Birch,
BA general framework for characterizing
studies of brain interface technology,[

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

Ann. Biomed. Eng., vol. 33, pp. 1653–1670,
2005.
Y. M. Chi, T. P. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs,
BDry-contact and noncontact biopotential
electrodes: Methodological review,[ IEEE
Rev. Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, pp. 106–119,
2010.
C.-T. Lin, L.-W. Ko, J.-C. Chiou, J.-R. Duann,
R.-S. Huang, T.-W. Chiu, S.-F. Liang, and
T.-P. Jung, BNoninvasive neural prostheses
using mobile and wireless EEG,[ Proc.
IEEE, vol. 96, pp. 1167–1183, 2008.
L.-D. Liao, I. J. Wang, S.-F. Chen,
J.-Y. Chang, and C.-T. Lin, BDesign,
fabrication and experimental validation
of a novel dry-contact sensor for measuring
electroencephalography signals without
skin preparation,[ Sensors, vol. 11,
pp. 5819–5834, 2011.
C. T. Lin, L. D. Liao, Y. H. Liu, I. J. Wang,
B. S. Lin, and J. Y. Chang, BNovel dry
polymer foam electrodes for long-term
EEG measurement,[ IEEE Trans. Biomed.
Eng., vol. 58, pp. 1200–1207, 2011.
S. Makeig, C. Kothe, T. Mullen,
N. Bigdely-Shamlo, Z. Zhang, and
K. Kreutz-Delgado, BEvolving signal
processing for brain-computer interfaces,[
Proc. IEEE, 2012, DOI: 10.1109/JPROC.2012.
2185009.
B. J. Lance, S. E. Kerick, A. J. Ries, K. S. Oie,
and K. McDowell*, BBrain-computer
interface technologies in the coming
decades,[ Proc. IEEE, 2012, DOI:
10.1109/JPROC.2012.2184830.
M. Roberto, BThe electrode-skin interface
and optimal detection of bioelectric
signals,[ Physiologic. Measur., vol. 31,
2010.
A. Searle and J. Kirkup, BA direct comparison
of wet, dry and insulating biolelectric
recording electrodes,[ Physiologic. Measur.,
vol. 21, pp. 271–283, 2000.
T. W. Picton, S. Bentin, P. Berg, E. Donchin,
S. A. Hillyard, R. Johnson, G. A. Miller,
W. Ritter, D. S. Ruchkin, M. D. Rugg, and
M. J. Taylor, BGuidelines for using human
event-related potentials to study cognition:
Recording standards and publication
criteria,[ Psychophysiology, vol. 37,
pp. 127–152, Mar. 2000.
N. A. Alba, R. J. Sclabassi, M. Sun, and
X. T. Cui, BNovel hydrogel-based
preparation-free EEG electrode,[ IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehab. Eng., vol. 18,
pp. 415–423, Aug. 2010.
O. Sohn and D. Kim, BTheoretical
and experimental investigation of the
swelling behavior of sodium polyacrylate
superabsorbent particles,[ J. Appl. Polymer
Sci., vol. 87, pp. 252–257, Jan. 10, 2003.
I. Volosyak, D. Valbuena, T. Malechka,
J. Peuscher, and A. Gräser, BBrain-computer
interface using water-based electrodes,[
J. Neural Eng., vol. 7, p. 066007, 2010.
T. C. Ferree, P. Luu, G. S. Russell, and
D. M. Tucker, BScalp electrode impedance,
infection risk, and EEG data quality,[
Clin. Neurophys., vol. 112, pp. 536–544,
2001.
G. Ruffini, S. Dunne, E. Farrés,
J. Marco-Pallarés, C. Ray, E. Mendoza,
R. Silva, and C. Grau, BA dry
electrophysiology electrode using
CNT arrays,[ Sens. Actuators A: Phys.,
vol. 132, pp. 34–41, 2006.
P. Griss, P. Enoksson, H. K. Tolvanen-Laakso,
P. Meriläinen, S. Ollmar, and G. Stemme,
BMicromachined electrodes for biopotential

[46]

[47]

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

measurement,[ IEEE J. Microelectromech.
Syst., vol. 10, pp. 10–15, 2001.
Y. Wang, K. Guo, W.-H. Pei, Q. Gui, X.-Q. Li,
H.-D. Chen, and J.-H. Yang, BFabrication of
dry electrode for recording bio-potentials,[
Chinese Phys. Lett., vol. 28, p. 010701, 2011.
P. Griss, H. K. Tolvanen-Laakso,
P. Meriläinen, and G. Stemme,
BCharacterization of micromachined
spiked biopotentials electrodes,[ IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 49, pp. 597–604,
2002.
G. Anna, S. Hansen, and J. Müller,
BNovel dry electrodes for ECG monitoring,[
Physiologic. Measur., vol. 28, p. 1375, 2007.
K. P. Hoffmann and R. Ruff, BFlexible
dry surface-electrodes for ECG long-term
monitoring,[ in Proc. IEEE 29th Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., EMBS 2007,
2007, pp. 5739–5742.
J.-Y. Baek, J.-H. An, J.-M. Choi, K.-S. Park,
and S.-H. Lee, BFlexible polymeric dry
electrodes for the long-term monitoring
of ECG,[ Sens. Actuators A: Phys., vol. 143,
pp. 423–429, 2008.
L. Beckmann, C. Neuhaus, G. Medrano,
N. Jungbecker, M. Walter, T. Gries, and
S. Leonhardt, BCharacterization of
textile electrodes and conductors using
standardized measurement setups,[
Physiologic. Measur., vol. 31, p. 233, 2010.
P. J. Xu, H. Zhang, and X. M. Tao,
BTextile-structured electrodes for
electrocardiogram,[ Textile Progr.,
vol. 40, pp. 183–213, 2008.
W. S. Eric, T. Peter, A. S. William, M. Tobin,
M. V. Theresa, and M. Robert, BA novel
dry electrode for brain-computer interface,[
in Proc. 13th Int. Conf. Human-Computer
Interaction. Part II: Novel Interaction
Methods and Techniques, San Diego, CA, 2009.
R. Matthews, N. J. McDonald, H. Anumula,
J. Woodward, P. J. Turner, M. A. Steindorf,
K. Chang, and J. M. Pendleton, BNovel
hybrid bioelectrodes for ambulatory
zero-prep EEG measurements using
multi-channel wireless EEG system,[
Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 4565, pp. 137–146, 2007.
R. Matthews, P. J. Turner, N. J. McDonald,
K. Ermolaev, T. M. Manus, R. A. Shelby,
and M. Steindorf, BReal time workload
classification from an ambulatory wireless
EEG system using hybrid EEG electrodes,[
in Proc. IEEE 30th Annu. Int. Conf., Eng.
Med. Biol. Soc., EMBS 2008, 2008, pp. 5871–
5875.
G. Cristian, C. D. Voinescu, and S. Fazli,
BBristle-sensors-low-cost flexible passive
dry EEG electrodes for neurofeedback and
BCI applications,[ J. Neural Eng., vol. 8,
p. 025008, 2011.
R. Matthews, N. J. McDonald, I. Fridman,
P. Hervieux, and T. Nielsen, BThe invisible
electrodeVZero prep time, ultra low
capacitive sensing,[ in Proc. 11th Int.
Conf. Human Computer Int., Las Vegas,
NV, 2005, pp. 22–27.
G. Ruffini, S. Dunne, L. Fuentemilla,
C. Grau, E. Farr, J. Marco-Pallar,
P. C. P. Watts, and S. R. P. Silva, BFirst
human trials of a dry electrophysiology
sensor using a carbon nanotube array
interface,[ Sens. Actuators A: Phys.,
vol. 144, pp. 275–279, 2008.
J. A. Katine and E. E. Fullerton, BDevice
implications of spin-transfer torques,[ J.
Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 320, pp. 1217–1226,
Apr. 2008.

Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012 | Proceedings of the IEEE

1563

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

[60] A. E. Wickenden, C. Fazi, B. Huebschman,
R. Kaul, A. C. Perrella, W. H. Rippard, and
M. R. Pufall, BSpin Torque Nano
Oscillators as Potential Terahertz (THz)
Communications Devices,[ Army
Research Laboratory Tech. Rep., 2009,
vol. ARL-TR-4807.
[61] H. Lee, B. P. Lee, and P. B. Messersmith,
BA reversible wet/dry adhesive inspired
by mussels and geckos,[ Nature, vol. 448,
pp. 338–U334, Jul. 19, 2007.
[62] M. Takeuchi, E. Hori, K. Takamoto, A. Tran,
K. Satoru, A. Ishikawa, T. Ono, S. Endo,
and H. Nishijo, BBrain cortical mapping
by simultaneous recording of functional
near infrared spectroscopy and
electroencephalograms from the whole brain
during right median nerve stimulation,[
Brain Topogr., vol. 22, pp. 197–214,
2009.
[63] R. J. Cooper, N. L. Everdell, L. C. Enfield,
A. P. Gibson, A. Worley, and J. C. Hebden,
BDesign and evaluation of a probe for
simultaneous EEG and near-infrared
imaging of cortical activation,[ Phys. Med.
Biol., vol. 54, pp. 2093–2102, Apr. 7, 2009.
[64] C.-T. Lin, L.-W. Ko, M.-H. Chang,
J.-R. Duann, J.-Y. Chen, T.-P. Su, and
T.-P. Jung, BReview of wireless and
wearable electroencephalogram systems
and brain-computer interfacesVA
mini-review,[ Gerontology, 2009.
[65] A. Casson, D. Yates, S. Smith, J. Duncan,
and E. Rodriguez-Villegas, BWearable
electroencephalography,[ IEEE Eng. Med.
Biol. Mag., vol. 29, pp. 44–56, 2010.
[66] C.-T. Lin, L.-W. Ko, C.-J. Chang, Y.-T. Wang,
C.-H. Chung, F.-S. Yang, J.-R. Duann,
T.-P. Jung, and J.-C. Chiou, BWearable and
wireless brain-computer interface and its
applications,[ in Foundations of Augmented
Cognition. Neuroergonomics and Operational
Neuroscience, vol. 5638, D. Schmorrow,
I. Estabrooke, and M. Grootjen, Eds.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2009,
pp. 741–748.
[67] Y. M. Chi, P. Ng, E. Kang, J. Kang,
J. Fang, and G. Cauwenberghs, BWireless
non-contact cardiac and neural monitoring,[
in Proc. Wireless Health 2010, San Diego,
California, 2010, pp. 15–23.
[68] Y.-T. Wang et al., BA cell-phone-based
brain-computer interface for communication
in daily life,[ J. Neural Eng., vol. 8,
p. 025018, 2011.
[69] T. Torfs, V. Leonov, R. F. Yazicioglu,
P. Merken, C. V. Hoof, R. J. M. Vullers, and
B. Gyselinckx, BWearable autonomous
wireless electro-encephalography system
fully powered by human body heat,[ in Proc.
2008 IEEE Sensors, 2008, pp. 1269–1272.
[70] A. Riera, S. Dunne, I. Cester, and G. Ruffini,
BSTARFAST: A wireless wearable EEG/ECG
biometric system based on the ENOBIO
sensor,[ in Proc. 5th pHealth Workshop
Wearable Micro Nanosyst. Pers. Health
(pHealth’08), 2008.
[71] L. Brown, J. V. D. Molengraft,
R. F. Yazicioglu, T. Torfs, J. Penders, and
C. V. Hoof, BA low-power, wireless,
8-channel EEG monitoring headset,[ in
Proc. IEEE 2010 Annu. Int. Conf. Eng. Med.
Biol. Soc. (EMBC), 2010, pp. 4197–4200.
[72] M. K. Mukerjee, BNeuroPhone:
Brain-mobile phone interface using
a wireless EEG headset,[ MobiHeld, 2010
[73] Neurowear, Necomimi, 2011. [Online].
Available: http://neurowear.net/?p=28
[74] R. Martins, S. Selberherr, and F. A. Vaz,
BA CMOS IC for portable EEG acquisition

1564

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

[84]

[85]

[86]

[87]

[88]

[89]

systems,[ IEEE Trans. Instrum. Measur.,
vol. 47, pp. 1191–1196, 1998.
S.-B. Maryam, K. L. Rakesh, and
K. S. Dinesh, BA low-power and compact
analog CMOS processing chip for portable
ECG recorders,[ in Proc. 2005 Asian
Solid-State Circuits Conf., 2005, pp. 473–476.
H. Chun-Chieh, H. Shao-Hang, C. Jen-Feng,
L. D. Van, and L. Chin-Teng, BFront-end
amplifier of low-noise and tunable BW/gain
for portable biomedical signal acquisition,[
in Proc. 2008 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst,
ISCAS 2008, 2008, pp. 2717–2720.
M. Belloni, E. Bonizzoni, A. Fornasari, and
F. Maloberti, BA micropower chopperVCDS
operational amplifier,[ IEEE J. Solid-State
Circuits, vol. 45, pp. 2521–2529, 2010.
G. Costa, A. Arnaud, and M. Miguez,
BA precision autozero amplifier for EEG
signals,[ in Proc. 23rd Symp. Integr. Circuits
Syst. Design, São Paulo, Brazil, 2010,
pp. 28–32.
E. Chua and W. C. Fang, BMixed bio-signal
lossless data compressor for portable
brain-heart monitoring systems,[
IEEE Trans. Consumer Electron., vol. 57,
pp. 267–273, Feb. 2011.
N. Sriraam and C. Eswaran, BAn adaptive
error modeling scheme for the lossless
compression of EEG signals,[ IEEE Trans.
Inf. Technol. Biomed., vol. 12, pp. 587–594,
Sep. 2008.
J. R. Tolbert, P. Kabali, S. Brar, and
S. Mukhopadhyay, BAn accuracy aware
low power wireless EEG unit with
information content based adaptive data
compression,[ in Proc. 2009 IEEE Annu.
Int. Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., EMBC 2009,
2009, pp. 5417–5420.
G. Higgins, S. Faul, R. P. McEvoy,
B. McGinley, M. Glavin, W. P. Marnane,
and E. Jones, BEEG compression using
JPEG2000: How much loss is too
much?[ in Proc. 2010 IEEE Annu. Int.
Conf. Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. (EMBC 2010),
2010, pp. 614–617.
A. von Cresce and K. Xu, BElectrolyte
additive in support of 5 V Li ion chemistry,[
J. Electrochem. Soc., vol. 158, pp. A337–A342,
2011.
J. L. Allen, T. R. Jow, and J. Wolfenstine,
BImproved cycle life of Fe-substituted
LiCoPO(4),[ J. Power Sources, vol. 196,
pp. 8656–8661, Oct. 15, 2011.
S. A. Karamian and J. J. Carroll, BCross
section for inelastic neutron Bacceleration[
by (178)Hf(m2),[ Phys. Rev. C, vol. 83,
Feb. 9, 2011.
M. S. Litz, G. Merkel, N. R. Pereira,
C. N. Boyer, G. E. Holland, J. W. Schumer,
J. F. Seely, L. T. Hudson, and J. J. Carroll,
BAnomalous fluorescence line intensity
in megavoltage bremsstrahlung,[ Phys.
Plasmas, vol. 17, Apr. 2010.
X. Lin, C. Meyer, C. M. Dougherty,
S. Bedair, B. Morgan, D. P. Arnold, and
R. Bashirullah, BTowards miniature step-up
power converters for mobile microsystems,[
in Proc. IEEE 2011 Twenty-Sixth Annu.
Appl. Power Electron. Conf. Expo., 2011,
pp. 1451–1455.
C. D. Meyer, S. S. Bedair, B. C. Morgan, and
D. P. Arnold, BHigh-inductance-density,
air-core, power inductors, and transformers
designed for operation at 100–500 MHz,[
IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, pp. 2236–2239,
Jun. 2010.
S. S. Bedair, C. D. Meyer, and B. Morgan,
BClosed core inductor and high-K dielectric
capacitor fabrication through evaporation

Proceedings of the IEEE | Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]

[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

driven nanoparticle assembly in capillaries,[
J. Appl. Phys., vol. 109, Apr. 1, 2011.
L. T. Le, M. H. Ervin, H. W. Qiu, B. E. Fuchs,
and W. Y. Lee, BGraphene supercapacitor
electrodes fabricated by inkjet printing
and thermal reduction of graphene oxide,[
Electrochem. Commun., vol. 13,
pp. 355–358, Apr. 2011.
S. Han, A. Censi, A. D. Straw, and
R. M. Murray, BA bio-plausible design
for visual pose stabilization,[ in Proc.
Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2010,
pp. 5679–5686.
S. Makeig, K. Gramann, T. P. Jung,
T. J. Sejnowski, and H. Poizner,
BLinking brain, mind and behavior,[
Int. J. Psychophys., vol. 73, pp. 95–100,
Aug. 2009.
A. Clark, BAn embodied cognitive science?[
Trends in Cogn. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 345–351,
Sep. 1999.
G. Maimon, A. D. Straw, and
M. H. Dickinson, BActive flight increases
the gain of visual motion processing in
Drosophila,[ Nature Neurosci., vol. 13,
pp. 393–399, Mar. 2010.
C. M. Niell and M. P. Stryker, BModulation
of visual responses by behavioral state in
mouse visual cortex,[ Neuron, vol. 65,
pp. 472–479, Feb. 25, 2010.
A. Wykowska, A. Schubo, and B. Hommel,
BHow you move is what you see: Action
planning biases selection in visual search,[
J. Exper. Psychology-Human Perception
Perform., vol. 35, pp. 1755–1769, Dec. 2009.
K. Gramann, BEmbodiment of spatial
reference frames and individual differences
in reference frame proclivity,[ Spatial
Cogn. Comput., 2011.
K. Gramann, J. T. Gwin, N. Bigdely-Shamlo,
D. P. Ferris, and S. Makeig, BVisual evoked
responses during standing and walking,[
Frontiers Human Neurosci., vol. 5, p. 12,
Oct. 29, 2010.
J. T. Gwin, K. Gramann, S. Makeig, and
D. P. Ferris, BRemoval of movement
artifact from high-density EEG recorded
during walking and running,[ J. Neurophys.,
vol. 103, pp. 3526–3534, Jun. 2010.
J. T. Gwin, K. Gramann, S. Makeig, and
D. P. Ferris, BElectrocortical activity
is coupled to gait cycle phase during
treadmill walking,[ Neuroimage, vol. 54,
pp. 1289–1296, Jan. 15, 2011.
S. C. Liu, J. M. Shi, E. W. Forsythe,
S. M. Blomquist, and D. Chiu,
BPolymer charge-transfer complexes
for opto-electronic applications,[ Synth.
Metals, vol. 159, pp. 1438–1442, Jul. 2009.
Y. G. Sun and J. A. Rogers, BInorganic
semiconductors for flexible electronics,[
Adv. Mater., vol. 19, pp. 1897–1916,
Aug. 3, 2007.
D. H. Kim, N. S. Lu, R. Ma, Y. S. Kim,
R. H. Kim, S. D. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won,
H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T. I. Kim,
R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Z. Xu, M. Li,
H. J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick,
P. Liu, Y. W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto,
Y. G. Huang, T. Coleman, and J. A. Rogers,
BEpidermal electronics,[ Science, vol. 333,
pp. 838–843, Aug. 12, 2011.
K. Crowley, A. Sliney, I. Pitt, and D. Murphy,
BEvaluating a brain-computer interface to
categorise human emotional response,[ in
Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Adv. Learning
Technol., 2010, pp. 276–278.
Emotiv. [Online]. Available: http://www.
emotiv.com

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

[106] C. Drake, V. Gumenyuk, C. Jefferson,
A. Kick, M. Coaker, and T. Roth,
BExtending time in bed in short sleepers:
Effects on objective sleep parameters
measured in the home,[ Sleep, vol. 33,
p. A113, 2010.
[107] Y. M. Chi and G. Cauwenberghs, BWireless
non-contact EEG/ECG Electrodes for body
sensor networks,[ in Proc. 2010 Int. Conf.
Body Sensor Netw., 2010, pp. 297–301.

[108] L.-D. Liao, C.-Y. Chen, I-J. Wang,
S.-F. Chen, S.-Y. Li, B.-W. Chen, J.-Y. Chang,
and C.-T. Lin, BGaming control using a
wearable and wireless EEG-based
brain-computer interface device with novel
dry foam-based sensors,[ J. NeuroEng.
Rehab., vol. 9, no. 5, 2012.
[109] D. Riaño, F. Real, F. Campana, S. Ercolani,
and R. Annicchiarico, BAn ontology for
the care of the elder at home,[ in Artificial

Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 5651, C. Combi,
Y. Shahar, and A. Abu-Hanna, Eds. Berlin,
Germany: Springer, 2009, pp. 235–239.
[110] P. Kannus, H. Sievänen, M. Palvanen,
T. Järvinen, and J. Parkkari, BPrevention
of falls and consequent injuries in
elderly people,[ The Lancet, vol. 366,
pp. 1885–1893, 2005.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Lun-De Liao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
in mechanical engineering from Chung Yuan Christian
University, Taiwan, in 2006, the M.S. degree in
engineering science from National Cheng-Kung
University, Taiwan, in 2008, and the Ph.D. degree
in electrical engineering from National Chiao Tung
University (NCTU), Taiwan, in February 2012. He is
currently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Brain
Research Center, NCTU.
In recent years, his research interests have
included biomedical optics imaging, advanced sensing techniques,
cognitive neuroscience, and neuroimaging.
Mr. Liao was the recipient of the 2005 Best Paper Award from National
Society of Engineers, Taiwan; 2006 the AUO Award; 2006 the Acer LongTerm 3nd-prize Award; 2007 Top Research Paper Award of Year by SPIE
Journal paper is selected; 2007 the MekTec 3nd-prize Award; 2007 the
Acer Long-Term 2nd-prize Award; 2009 SID Travel Fellowship; 2009 IEEE
Intermag Travel Fellowship; 2009 the Best Paper Award from the
Symposium on Nano Device Technology; 2010 Best Paper Award from
International Symposium on Biomedical Engineering. He also won the
2011 Young Investigator’s Award from the world association for Chinese
biomedical engineers for his contributions on medical imaging &
bioelectronics domain.
Chin-Teng (CT) Lin (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in control engineering from National
Chiao-Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan,
in 1986 and the M.S.E.E. and Ph.D. degrees in
electrical engineering from Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, in 1989 and 1992, respectively.
Since August 1992, he has been with the College of Electrical Engineering and the College of
Computer Science, NCTU, where he is the Provost
and the Lifelong Chair Professor of the Department of Electrical Engineering. He served as the Founding Dean of
Computer Science College of NCTU from 2005 to 2007. He is the author of
the textbook author of Neural Fuzzy Systems (Prentice Hall) and Neural
Fuzzy Control Systems with Structure and Parameter Learning (World
Scientific). He has published over 165 journal papers, including about
77 IEEE transactions papers. His research interests are in translational
neuroscience, computational intelligent technologies, soft computing,
brain–computer interface, smart living technology, intelligent transportation systems, robotics and intelligent sensing, and nano-bio-information
technologies and cognitive science (NBIC).
Dr. Lin was elevated to IEEE Fellow in 2005 for contributions to
biologically inspired information systems. He was honored with
Outstanding Electrical and Computer Engineer (OECE), Purdue University
in 2011. He was a member of the Board of Governors (BoG) of the IEEE
Systems, Man, Cybernetics Society (SMCS) from 2003 to 2005 and IEEE
Circuit and Systems Society (CASS) (2005–2008), and the current AdCom
member of IEEE Computational Intelligence Society (CIS) (2008–2010).
Dr. Lin is the IEEE Distinguished Lecturer from 2003 to 2005. He currently
serves as an Editor-in-Chief (EIC) of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON FUZZY SYSTEMS.
He was an associate editor (AE) of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYSTEMS, MAN, AND
CYBERNETICS, PART II. He also served as the Deputy EIC of the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, PART II from 2006 to 2007. Dr. Lin is

the General Chair of FUZZ-IEEE 2011 held in Taipei, and was the Program
Chair of the 2006 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics held in Taipei. He was the president of Board of Government
(BoG) of Asia Pacific Neural Networks Assembly (APNNA) from 2004 to
2005. Dr. Lin has own the Outstanding Research Award granted by
National Science Council (NSC), Taiwan, since 1997 to present, the Outstanding Professor Award granted by the Chinese Institute of Engineering
(CIE) in 2000, and the 2002 Taiwan Outstanding Information-Technology
Expert Award. He was also elected to be one of 38th Ten Outstanding
Rising Stars in Taiwan (2000). Dr. Lin is a member of Tau Beta Pi, Eta
Kappa Nu, and Phi Kappa Phi honorary societies.

Kaleb McDowell (Senior Member, IEEE) was born
in Frederick, MD, on July 10, 1970. He received the
B.S. degree in operations research and industrial
engineering from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, in
1992, the M.S. degree in kinesiology from the
University of Maryland, College Park, in 2000, and
the Ph.D. degree in neuroscience and cognitive
science from the University of Maryland, College
Park, in 2003.
He is currently the Chief of the Translational
Neuroscience Branch and Chair of the Neuroscience Strategic Research
Area at the U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) in Aberdeen Proving
Grounds, MD. Since joining ARL as a Research Psychologist in 2003, he
has contributed to over 30 reviewed publications, and has led several
major research and development programs focused on neuroscience,
indirect vision systems and vehicle mobility. His current research interest
focuses on translating basic neuroscience into applications for use by
healthy populations in everyday, real-world environments.
Dr. McDowell received Department of Army Research and Development Achievement awards for technical excellence in 2007 and 2009 and
the ARL Award for Leadership in 2011.

Alma E. Wickenden (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in physical science in 1985, and the
M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in materials science and
engineering from Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD, in 1989 and 1993, respectively.
She is a Senior Researcher with the Army
Research Laboratory’s Sensors and Electron
Devices Directorate in Adelphi, MD. Her research
interests include electronic materials, nano-/
microelectronic sensor devices, and bio/neuroinspired control theory for power-constrained sensor arrays. She established ARL’s Nanoelectronics Team and the ARL Science Outreach for
Army Research (SOAR) multidisciplinary internship program. She
currently serves as the Technical Assistant to ARL’s Associate Director
of Science & Technology, with responsibilities for the technical
oversight of the quality and direction of ARL’s Science and Technology
programs. She has published over 80 publications in the field of wide
bandgap III-nitride semiconductor materials and nanoelectronics.
Dr. Wickenden is a member of the IEEE and the American Vacuum
Society, where she is a member of the Electronic Materials & Processing
Division Executive Committee.

Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012 | Proceedings of the IEEE

1565

Liao et al.: Biosensor Technologies for Augmented BCIs in the Next Decades

Klaus Gramann received the Pre-Diploma in
psychology from Justus-Liebig-University Giessen,
and the Diploma and Ph.D. degree in psychology
from Rheinisch-Westfaelisch-Technical University
Aachen in 1998 and 2002, respectively.
He worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher in the
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Department of Psychology from 2002 to 2007, and the
Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, from
2007 to 2011. After spending half a year as a Visiting Professor at the
Brain Research Center of National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan, he is now Professor for Cognitive Psychology at University
Osnabruck, Germany. His research focuses on neural dynamics of spatial
orientation and visual attention and the development of a mobile brain
imaging method.

Tzyy-Ping Jung (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from
National Chiao-Tung University, Taiwan, in 1984,
and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical
engineering from The Ohio State University,
Columbus, in 1989 and 1993, respectively.
He was a Research Associate with the Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, CA. He is currently a Research
Scientist and the Co-Director of the Center for
Advanced Neurological Engineering, Institute of Engineering in Medicine,
University of California at San Diego (UCSD). He is also an Associate
Director of the Swartz Center for Computational Neuroscience, Institute
for Neural Computation, and an Adjunct Professor of Bioengineering at
the UCSD. In addition, he is a Professor of Department of Computer
Science, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His research
interests are in the areas of biomedical signal processing, cognitive
neuroscience, machine learning, time-frequency analysis of human EEG,
functional neuroimaging, and brain computer interfaces and interactions.

1566

Proceedings of the IEEE | Vol. 100, May 13th, 2012

Li-Wei (Leo) Ko (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in mathematics from National Chung
Cheng University in 2001, the M.S. degree in
educational measurement and statistics from
National Taichung University in 2004, and the
Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Taiwan,
in 2007.
He is currently an Executive Officer of the Brain
Research Center (BRC) in NCTU, and the Assistant
Professor in Department of Biological Science and Technology in NCTU.
He is also the Visiting Scholar at Institute for Neural Computation in
University of California at San Diego. His primary research interests are to
apply computational intelligence technologies such as time-frequency
analysis and neural networks to analyze neural activities associated with
human cognitive functions and develop the mobile and wireless brain
machine interface in unconstrained, actively engaged human subjects in
daily life applications. Relevant research fields cover neural networks,
neural fuzzy systems, machine learning, brain computer interface, and
computational neuroscience.
Dr. Ko is an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NEURAL
NETWORKS in the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society.

Jyh-Yeong Chang (Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in control engineering in 1976 and
the M.S. degree in electronic engineering in 1980,
both from the National Chiao-Tung University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering from the North Carolina State University, Raleigh, in 1987.
During 1976–1978 and 1980–1982, he was a
Research Fellow at Chung Shan Institute of
Science and Technology, Lung-Tan, Taiwan. Since
1987, he has been an Associate Professor in the Department of Electrical
Engineering, National Chiao-Tung University, where he is currently a
Professor. His current research interests include neural fuzzy systems,
video processing and surveillance, and e-health systems.

