Journal of King Saud University – Computer and Information Sciences (2016) xxx, xxx–xxx

King Saud University

Journal of King Saud University –
Computer and Information Sciences
www.ksu.edu.sa
www.sciencedirect.com

Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement
Prasant Kumar Pattnaik *, Jay Sarraf
School of Computer Engineering, KIIT University, Bhubaneswar, India
Received 27 April 2016; revised 15 July 2016; accepted 20 September 2016

KEYWORDS
BCI;
Non invasive;
Feature extraction;
EEG

Abstract This paper focuses on the Brain Computer Interface (BCI) application and its issues.
Further the attempt was made to implement left and right hand movement classification after
removal of the artifacts in the acquired signals of the various hand movements.
Ó 2016 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is
an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Contents
1.

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.1. Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2. Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Experiment on the scenario of the hand movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1. RMS and MAV calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2. Feature extraction using Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4. Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00
00

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: patnaikprasant@gmail.com, patnaikprasantfcs@
kiit.ac.in (P.K. Pattnaik), jaysarraf596@gmail.com (J. Sarraf).
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.

Production and hosting by Elsevier

The Brain Computer Interface (BCI) involves a combination
of the brain and device both sharing an interface to enable
communication channel between the brain and an object that
have to be controlled externally. The human brain has innumerable neurons which are connected to each other for transmission of impulses. As an electrode chip is implemented into
the brain via surgical methodology the electrical signals produced by the neurons are transmitted to the computer which
then translates the signals into data. These data are interpreted

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006
1319-1578 Ó 2016 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Please cite this article in press as: Pattnaik, P.K., Sarraf, J. Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006

2

P.K. Pattnaik, J. Sarraf

to control a computer device. In 2013, Lebedev successfully
coupled the brains of two rats making use of an interface to
enable direct sharing of information (Pais-Vieira et al.,
2013). Minute fluctuations in voltages between neurons are
measured and signals are amplified to produce graphs. While
the Invasive BCIs focus on direct implementation into the grey
matter of the brain to produce the highest quality of signals by
neurosurgery, Non Invasive BCIs make use of techniques like
Electroencephalography (EEG), Magneto Encephalography
(MEG) and function Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI).
EEG techniques experience placing of electrodes on the scalp
accompanied by a conductive gel or paste. Many systems are
known to use electrodes which are attached to separate wires.
Over the years, BCI has been instrumental in developing intelligent relaxation devices, providing enhanced control of
devices like wheelchairs and vehicles, controlling robots and
computer cursors and providing an additional channel of control in computer games. Bionic eyes have been known to
restore sight for people having vision loss (Krishnaveni
et al., 2012).
Considering the case of a motor imagery which refers to a
mental process wherein an individual replicates an action.
Thus, a mental representation of movement prevails without
an actual body movement. Imagination efficiency is hard to
control. Hence controlling EEG enables an individual to communicate despite the inability to control voluntary muscles.
Interface substitute for nerves and muscles and the signals
are incorporated into the hardware and software to be translated into physical actions. EEG based BCIs can record and
classify EEG changes through different types of motor imagery like imagination of right and left hand and activity, consequently motor imagery as means to enhance motor function
and motor learning. It has made a significant contribution in
the field of neurological rehabilitation, cognitive neuroscience
and cognitive psychology. Clinical applications have procured
a great deal of aid from motor imagery ranging from enhancing mobility and locomotion to reduce neuropathic pain
(Malouin and Richards, 2013). Analysis and interception of
data are challenging as EEG signals are vulnerable to varying
fluctuations often termed as noise. Various strategies have
been devised for prevention and removal of noise. In this
paper, we apply Butterworth filter mechanism to eliminate
noise from the signals to enhance the data quality. Besides
we concentrate on feature extraction to transform raw signals
into informative signals. We make use of Support Vector
Machine for the same. Feature extraction contributes significantly in image processing.
A step by step process involved in Brain Computer Interface system is shown in the Fig. 1. Signal is acquired through

Figure 1

various means such as invasive (ECog, Neurosurgery) and
Non-invasive (EEG, fMRI, MEG) techniques. The channel
selection is one of the important considerations since most of
the EEG channel represent redundant information (Sleight
et al., 2009).
Fig. 2 shows the EEG channel placement on the human
scalp. Each scalp electrode is located at the brain centres. In
2001 Pfurtscheller (Wolpaw, 2002) identified that many of
the neural activity related to fist movements are found in channels C3, C4 and Cz as shown in Fig. 2 B. F7 is for rational
activities, Fz is for intentional and motivational data, P3, P4
and Pz contain perception and differentiation, T3, T4 is for
emotional processes, T5, T6 has memory functions and O1
and O2 contain visualization data.
In order to remove the noise from the obtained signal, any
of the suitable filtering techniques may be adopted. Further the
extracted data may move for classification phase.
1.1. Applications
Some of the popular applications of the BCI system are shown
in Fig. 3 and each of them are discussed below:
The applications shown in Fig. 3 have been mentioned
below:
i. BCI for communication and control: BCI for communication for and control mainly incorporate applications like
spelling devices, environmental control and Functional Electric Stimulation (FES) or prosthetic devices. Non-muscular
communication and control are not only limited to guesswork.
It has been reported in Graimann et al. (2007) that a direct
contact between the brain and external world is attainable
and can be used for several useful purposes. BCIs are yet to
achieve the ability to fly airplanes and most likely not anytime
soon. Currently implemented BCIs at most are capable of
reaching 25 bits/min. This modest capacity may be valuable
for those who lack voluntary muscle control or for those in
whom the remaining control is weak, easily fatigued, or unreliable. Patients with immobile condition (e.g. by ALS, brainstem stroke, or severe polyneuropathy) or lack any 778 J.R.
Wolpaw et al./Clinical Neurophysiology 113 (2002) 767–791
useful muscle control (e.g. due to severe cerebral palsy), a
BCI aids in giving the ability to answer simple questions and
control the environment (e.g. lights, temperature, television,
etc.). It may also be instrumental in performing slow word processing (i.e. with a predictive program, 25 bits/min could produce 2 words/min. It is possible for an intelligent wheelchair to
automatically avoid collisions and hazardous events or a robot
arm to independently manage specific movement scenarios and
identify and rectify safety issues which may be suitably

Process involved in brain computing interface system.

Please cite this article in press as: Pattnaik, P.K., Sarraf, J. Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006

Brain Computer Interface issues

3

Figure 2 EEG channel placements on the human scalp (http://static.wixstatic.com/media/1c3d1a_0df53d200a402620889eb084e288ad18.
jpg/v1/fill/w_475,h_437,al_c,lg_1,q_80/1c3d1a_0df53d200a402620889eb084e288ad18.jpg; http://blog.jfrey.info/images/openbci_p300_
coadapt/channels_P300.png).

Figure 3

Some applications of BCI system.

controlled by unreliable control signals like those imparted by
a BCI (Ang et al., 2011).
Accordingly the future value of BCI technology will rely
significantly on the increase in information transfer rate.
ii. Medical applications: Medical applications of BCI have
helped severely disabled people to work independently improving their quality of life. It has also helped prevention and
detection of various conscious level detection systems. The
major impact of smoking and alcohol on brain waves has been
stressed upon. Tumor is generated from unrestricted selfdividing of cells and may be identified using the EEG as a

cheap secondary substitute for MRI and CT-SCAN. EEGbased brain tumor detection systems have attracted many
researchers as pointed out in focuses on identifying breast cancer with the help of EEG signals. Measuring brain behavior
may diagnose dyslexia which is a brain disorder.
iii. Neurophysical regulation and rehabilitation: Neurophysical regulation and rehabilitation have a broad range of
feasible applications. One could anticipate that BCI dependent
neurofeedback therapies are additionally fruitful in comparison to normal neurofeedback. Neurological disorders which
may be successfully treated are attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), memory disorders, epilepsy, and stroke
(Ang et al., 2011). Consequently a BCI system may be contemplated as the most facilitating neurofeedback system of all systems available. BCI system supports neurophysiological
regulation and rehabilitation, and focuses primarily on selfregulation of brain patterns along with the cortical reorganization and compensatory cerebral activation of the entire brain
section. Predominant performance measures like high information transfer rates and accurate control serve as secondary for
the BCI applications (communication and control
applications).
Patients with mobility issues rely on rehabilitation for
restoring their lost functions and regaining former levels of
mobility for adapting to their acquired incapacity. Lack of
oxygen leads to collapsing of brain cells resulting in a condition called stroke. Such a situation forces the patient to lose
the ability to speak and deal with memory problems. Often
the left side of the body gets paralyzed. Brain signals have been
known to provide solutions for various disabilities and brain
strokes. It has been proclaimed in Birbaumer et al. (2013) that
it is possible to reorganize brain structures corresponding to
stroke injuries. Moreover, restoration of disrupted motor functions may be performed by neuroplasticity (Ruiz, 2014;
Anupama et al., 2012).
iv. Training and Education: Training and education is
related to the brain and its plasticity. The brain is capable of
changing, growing and remapping itself. Determining plasticity leads to improved training techniques and individual training regimens. Neuro-feedback training is an application to
Modular EEG devices 46 R.A. Ramadan et al. which aims
at effective working, attention, executive functions and memory. Neuroergonomics is an evaluation application for the

Please cite this article in press as: Pattnaik, P.K., Sarraf, J. Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006

4

P.K. Pattnaik, J. Sarraf

purpose of estimating the perfect match between human abilities and technology. BCI finds its use in education and training
methods (Zander and Jatzev, 2009). BCI based on EEG can
enable a patient to control or move the cursor in accordance
to mental thoughts wherein the patient may select words or letters. A collaborative BCI is responsible for enhancing the
effectiveness of training and education programs. This can
be achieved by monitoring either the student’s attention/concentration or ability to participate effectively. Real-time detection of emotions, frustration, or surprise (Jackson and
Mappus, 2010) enables training or educational applications
to adapt in various ways which are successful in enhancing
the learning rates of the students.
v. Games and Entertainment: Games and entertainment in
BCI apply to playing games like augmented reality, certain
applications on entertainment and 3D games. With the use
of 3D monitors, glasses and an EEG headset may be deployed
to control the game by thoughts.
The entertainment industry is extremely agile in introducing
new concepts and paradigms. Human computer interaction is
an alluring concept.3-Dtelevision, gesture-based game controllers, and games have been developed exclusively to be supported by EEG headsets. The past few years have witnessed
numerous products by companies such as Neurosky, Emotiv,
Uncle Milton, Mind Games, and Mattel.
EEG serious games deployed for emotional control and/or
neuroprosthetic rehabilitation may contain either a new game
idea or a revised one. The Brainball game by Tan and Nijholt
(Mathan, 2008) intends to drop the stress level. The only way
to move the ball is by relaxing; enabling the calmer player to be
the winner. Players tend to learn about controlling their stress
while being entertained.
vi. Authentication and Security: Authentication and security have introduced vast research in BCI for security systems.
EEG signals generated from driving behavior may be authenticated according to several researchers. The detection of
abnormal behavior and apprehensive objects may be underpinned by EEG alone or a combination of EEG and eye movements (Panoulas et al., 2010). It suggests a situation where a
group of 10 observers is assigned the work of watching CCTV
recordings or baggage scans. EEG and eye movements have
the potential to identify likely targets which may not be
noticed. The system is designed to monitor an observer’s arousal state and instigate a break whenever required. Even though

EEG is a formidable means for lie detection, reliability of BCI
systems is questioned for ethical use in practical situations
(Nakanishi et al., 2011). A simplified driving simulator with
mental task condition may be utilized to substantiate the driver’s identity Nakanishi et al., 2013; Revett et al., 2010;
Upreti, 2014 describes unconscious driver authentication.
1.2. Challenges
BCI has been an exciting forum for scientist, engineers and
medical practitioners. BCI researchers and developers must
engage themselves to tackle three critical problems for an exciting future: signal acquisition hardware, reliability and training
process and it is not free from challenges given in Fig. 4.
 Signal acquisition hardware: The signal acquisition hardware up gradation necessary for developing usable nonmedical BCI applications is a core challenge. EEG sensors must
be dry, agreeable, appropriate to use, and easy to modify
since before BCI systems must be favorable for utilization
beyond laboratories and hospitals. Deployed Sensors must
impart good signal quality even in extremely noisy environments having mobile users. It has already been presented by
researchers that BCIs can be used outside laboratories or
with a mobile user however performance is comparatively
poorer than in laboratory conditions. The work must satisfactorily focus on developing better active electrodes with
active shielding.
 Reliability: BCI systems have poor reliability for most of
the applications. It is important that a BCI system must
be appropriate for real time execution and well founded
for muscular actions in the human body. Without advancements, the actual usability of BCIs will continue to be the
only most used communication functions for users with severe disorders. The main problem is dependent on identify
and capture of 3 major issues: the intermediate role of a
robust and interactive BCI system; the requirement in
deploying a BCI system which emulate the diffuse the working of central nervous system; and a system which realizes
the necessity of integrating extra brain signals providing a
feedback mechanism (Liao et al., 2014).
 Training Process: Training the user is a time-consuming
activity. It finds its importance in either controlling the user
through the procedure or the number of sessions that have
been recorded (Nakanishi et al., 2011). Either the preliminary phase or the classifier calibration phase can be used
for the training process. The user may handle the system
to control his/her brain feedback signals in the preliminary
phase.

2. Related work

Figure 4

Original & filtered signal of left hand movement.

In 2013, Vighneshwari (Sleight et al., 2009), has analyzed the
EEG signals for the left and right hand movements. A block
diagram of Brain Computer Interface has been presented consisting of signal acquisition; signal processing, Feature extraction, Classification and output. Typical filtering solutions are
not sufficient to eradicate White Gaussian Noise, and the random noise interferences present in the EEG dominant frequency energy cannot be removed easily. WGN cannot be

Please cite this article in press as: Pattnaik, P.K., Sarraf, J. Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006

Brain Computer Interface issues
removed entirely and therefore highlights the necessity of feature extraction. One method of feature extraction is by making
use of wavelet transform. Continuous Wavelet Transform
analyses signals on the basis of functions which relate to each
other by virtue of scaling and translation. In Discrete Wavelet
Transform digital filtering techniques are deployed to obtain a
time scale representation of a digital signal. Filtering operations determine the resolution of the signal. Another method
for feature extraction is analysis of time and domain features.
The features are Integrated EEG, Mean Absolute Value,
Modified Mean Absolute Value 1, Modified Mean Absolute
Value 2, Simple Square Integral, Variance, Root Mean Square,
Waveform Length, Zero Crossing, Slope Sign Change and
Mean Absolute Deviation. All the features bear some sets of
mathematical calculations which trigger the Experimental
Results. The signal undergoes experimentation by being analyzed first and then being filtered by Signal Processing Toolbox
in MATLAB. Applying DWT to the signal yields Beta and
Alpha bands of frequencies. The percentage error is calculated
and the average percentage error for each movement in the
data set is evaluated thus giving the SNR ratio. Six features
are inspected for Left Open, Left Close, Right Open and Right
Close hence classifying the EEG signals.
In 2013 [25], Jae Won Bang proposed a method which
could detect the head movement by the average error rate of
3.22% comparatively less to other methods. The use of frontal
viewing camera along with the EEG acquisition hardware for
eliminating the noise produced by other activities on the head
movement and detection of the moving features taken by the
frontal camera made it possible to eliminate the noise in the
EEG data. Linear discriminant analysis and Support vector
machine were used to reduce the dimensions and perform the
classification of the dataset for improving the accuracy in
detecting the movements.
In 2014, Dokare (Wolpaw, 2002), classified EEG signals for
Imagined left and right Hand movements for BCI applications.
Major difficulties included in the motor imagery pattern recognition procedure are to successfully estimate, visualize and represent the ERD/ERS phenomenon in a feature vector. Feature
extraction technique uses of Discrete Wavelet tool for feature
extraction of the EEG signal. Support Vector Machine SVM
has been applied to classify the obtained features into the right
and left hand activity. The analysis has been carried out using
MATLAB. The work heavily relies upon wavelet transform
methodology, for decomposing an n input signal into elementary waveforms called as wavelets. The Discrete Wavelet
Transform (DWT) analyzes the signal at different frequency
bands with different resolutions by breaking down the EEG
signal into a rough approximation of carrying out by multi resolution analysis. DWT engaging two functions, scaling functions and wavelet functions, is associated with the low-pass
and high-pass band filters. Successive high-pass and low-pass
filtering decomposes the signal into different frequency bands
called as sub bands. The low pass filter gives the approximation coefficients, while the high-pass filter gives the detail coefficients. Hence the features may be used as classifier for
different finger movements.
In 2014, Ke Liao (Liao et al., 2014), used the EEG signals
to identify individual finger movements from one hand. The
experiment was carried out with 11 healthy right handed
subjects, the obtained EEG data were high passed at 0.3 Hz
making the use of elliptic Infinite Impulse Response (IIS) filter

5
in EEGLAB toolbox. To identify and evaluate finger movements Power Spectral Density (PSD) and Principal
Component Analysis (PCA) were calculated. The feature selection procedure was carried out using spectral PCA where every
dataset was divided into testing and training sets with respect
to fivefold cross validation having the entire dataset uniformly
separated into 5 commonly absolute subsets. The research concluded that the movement related to spectral structure in finger
movements can be decomposed using the spectral PSD which
could be employed to calculate individual finger movements
with a calculation accuracy of 77.11% promising to increase
the control dimension in EEG (noninvasive) based BCI
techniques.
In 2011 (Bang et al., 2013), A. K. Mohamed used the EEG
signals for showing the difference between EEG related to the
wrist and finger movements. For extracting unique features
based on ERS/ERD (Event Related Synchronization) the
Independent component Analysis (ICA) was used whereas
for feature reduction the Bhattacharya distance was used
which helped selecting the best feature with respect to separate
classes. Further it was stated that Mahalanobis distance is
found giving good performance in BCI research. It was used
to calculate the distance between each trial signal in a selected
class to its own average class. Alternatively, Artificial Neural
Network (ANN) was employed to divide the data into training
and testing set with the accuracy of 65% and 71% proving the
offline differentiation of hand and wrist movement possible.
3. Experiment on the scenario of the hand movement
Our assumption for the scenario of the hand movement is
based on Fig. 1 and the work focused on non-invasive BCI system. The experimented system performs filtering the raw
obtained signal applying Butterworth filter and the feature
extraction technique using supervised learning model, the Discrete Wavelet Transform. We thereby deploy a dataset to
ensure that all the steps are in accordance (Wolpaw, 2002).
The experiment has been conducted using the data sets
obtained by NUST (http://static.wixstatic.com/media/
1c3d1a_0df53d200a402620889eb084e288ad18.jpg/v1/fill/w_475,
h_437,al_c,lg_1,q_80/1c3d1a_0df53d200a402620889eb084e288
ad18.jpg). The data set was recorded at 500 Hz from a subject
21 year old right handed male with no known medical conditions. This data set consists of actual left and right hand movement recorded during his closed eyes. The order of the hand
movement was random and the recording was done using
Neurofax EEG system. From the obtained dataset, we considered the channels C3, and C4 as these channels contains the
needful information of the hand movement scenarios.
Whenever a signal is transmitted, it is to be received at
another end or into the space. Certain disturbances are known
to prevail. When thermal noise is generated due to electron
movement, the noise is labeled as Additive White Gaussian
Noise (AWGN). The common representation of the received
signal is as
Table 1

RMS and MAV in the non-filtered signal.

Features

Left backward 1

Left backward 2

RMS
MAV

51.7895
50.7707

61.3618
58.5482

Please cite this article in press as: Pattnaik, P.K., Sarraf, J. Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006

6

P.K. Pattnaik, J. Sarraf
Table 2

RMS and MAV in the filtered signal.

Features

Left backward 1

Left backward 2

RMS
MAV

48.0030
49.0439

59.3245
58.5264

Figure 5

Root Mean Square (RMS): It is modelled as amplitude
modulated Gaussian random process. It can be determined
in real time and is also simple to implement. Its features are
used in detecting onset activities, muscular contraction and
muscle activities. Its standard deviation formulae can be
expressed as
vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
u N
u1 X
RMS ¼ t
ð2Þ
x2
N n¼1 n
Mean Absolute Value (MAV): It is similar to average rectified value (ARV). It is calculated by taking the average of the
absolute value of the EEG signal which is an easy way for
observation of the muscle contraction levels. MAV can be
defined as:

Wavelet decomposition of the signal in 4 levels.

MAV ¼
YðtÞ ¼ XðtÞ þ nðtÞ

ð1Þ

where X(t) is the original signal and n(t) happens to be the
noise. The probability of n(t), zero is highest and considerably
decreases as the magnitude of n(t) is increased. The noise is
unanimously present with the same power at every frequency
and hence termed as Additive White Gaussian Noise. White
Gaussian noise is often used to symbolize noise in EEG signal
analysis and very difficult to eliminate completely.
Hence the signal is analyzed using the signal processing
toolbox in MATLAB. The signal is low-pass filtered using Butterworth filtering technique to 0–64 Hz. The non-filtered and
the filtered signal for the left hand movement are shown in
the Fig. 4.
3.1. RMS and MAV calculations
In the section, the originally acquired signal data (non-filtered)
of the left hand movement with the filtered signal data of the
left hand movement within the consideration of the parameters
say RMS and MAV has been calculated using Eqs. (2) and (3).
The calculated values are recorded in Tables 1 and 2
respectively.

Figure 6

N
1X
jxn j
N i¼1

ð3Þ

In the below Tables 1 and 2, two hand movement scenarios
were taken to justify the results.
The recorded value in Table 1 shows the value for left backward hand movement scenario 1 from the original signal having the RMS value as 51.7895 and MAV value as 50.7707.
Similarly it is recorded for left backward hand movement scenario 2. As shown in Table 2, the value for left backward hand
movement scenario 1 from the filtered signal having the RMS
value as 48.0030 and MAV as 49.0439 and similarly for the left
backward hand movement scenario 2. Comparing the RMS
and MAV values obtained from both the original and non filtered signals, the filtered signal in Table 2 indicates better
results upon applying the Butterworth filtering technique.
3.2. Feature extraction using Discrete Wavelet Transform
(DWT)
The DWT has been adopted in the feature extraction phase
where the multiple wavelets (filtered signals as a input) are
sampled discretely with a specific window size. For each window the wavelet transform technique is applied. In Fig. 5 the
level of decomposition of a signal is defined and divided into

Training signal along with the detail wavelets coefficient for the left backward hand movement.

Please cite this article in press as: Pattnaik, P.K., Sarraf, J. Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006

Brain Computer Interface issues
two wavelet coefficients namely the scaling coefficient and the
detailed coefficient. As the data are arranged a threshold is
provided to calculate the value of input data. In this experiment the threshold is considered as 250 Hz using the inverse
function. The signals are decomposed at different frequency
bands based on the threshold value. Successive high pass and
low pass filtering ensure signal decomposition into sub bands
and the lower pass filter is associated with approximation coefficients (Ca1) while the high pass filter is associated with
detailed coefficients (Cd1). The amount of levels of decomposition is considered by the presiding frequency components
which are a part of the signal (Fig. 6).
The filtered signal is divided into levels: cd1, cd2, cd3 and
Cd4 of frequency ranges beta (16 Hz–32 Hz), alpha
(8 Hz–16 Hz), theta (0 Hz–8 Hz) and delta respectively. The
approximation coefficient is cA5. The sampling frequency
was 500 Hz.
Further these wavelet coefficient decompositions can be
used as the feature vector for the classifier in order to classify
left/right hand movements using support vector machine
(SVM) classifier.
These feature vectors having the entire coefficient make a
large dimension, so we may only use cd2 and cd3 which has
a frequency range of 8–15 Hz and 16–32 Hz respectively.
4. Conclusion
Brain Computer Interface has been providing assistance to
severely disabled patients. Controlling the behavior of the
brain and receiving the information from other body parts, it
provides a channeling support between the human brain and
technical equipment. Having numerous applications in the
field of research and implementation BCI has always been
attracting the research community. We conclude the work with
the following:
 A small dataset of EEG signals for various finger and hand
movements were taken and the artifacts were removed by
applying low pass filtering technique and compared with
the original datasets which gave satisfactory results. The
alpha and beta band frequencies were extracted from the
EEG signal using Discrete Wavelet Transform and hence
considered forward for the classification of the signals.
In future we may study and compare various low-band filtering techniques for the removal of the artifacts present in the
signal.
References
Ang, C.S., Sakel, M., Pepper, M., Phillips, M., 2011. Use of brain
computer interfaces in neurological rehabilitation. Br. J. Neurosci.
Nurs. 7 (3), 523–528.
Anupama, H.S., Cauvery, N.K., Lingaraju, G.M., 2012. Brain
computer interface and its types-a study. Int. J. Adv. Eng. Technol.
3 (2), 739.

7
Bang, Jae Won, Choi, Jong-Suk, Kang, Ryoung Park, 2013. Noise
reduction in brainwaves by using both EEG signals and frontal
viewing camera images. Sensors 13, 6272–6294.
Birbaumer, Niels, Ruiz, Sergio, Sitaram, Ranganatha, 2013. Learned
regulation of brain metabolism. Trend Cogn. Sci. 17 (6), 295–302.
Graimann, Bernhard, Brendan Allison, Axel Gräser, 2007. New
applications for non-invasive brain-computer interfaces and the
need for engaging training environments. In: Proceedings of the
International
Conference
on
Advances
in
Computer
Entertainment.
http://static.wixstatic.com/media/1c3d1a_0df53d200a402620889eb084e288ad18.jpg/v1/fill/w_475,h_437,al_c,lg_1,q_80/1c3d1a_0df53d200a402620889eb084e288ad18.jpg, accessed on 09/01/2016.
http://blog.jfrey.info/images/openbci_p300_coadapt/channels_P300.
png, accessed on 09/01/2016.
Jackson, M.M., Mappus, R., 2010. Applications for brain-computer
interfaces. Brain Comput. Interf., 89–103
Krishnaveni, C.V., Lakkakula, Ramesh B., Sunki, Manasa, 2012.
Artificial Vision-A Bionic Eye Artificial Vision-A Bionic Eye.
IJCST 3 (1), 400–406.
Liao, Ke et al, 2014. Decoding individual finger movements from one
hand using human EEG signals. PLoS One 9 (1), e85192.
Malouin, Francine, Richards, Carol L., 2013. Clinical applications of
motor imagery in rehabilitation. Multisensory Imagery. Springer,
New York, pp. 397–419.
Mathan, S., 2008. Image search at the speed of thought. ACM
Interact. 15 (4), 76–77.
Nakanishi I, Baba S, Li S. Evaluation of brain waves as biometrics for
driver authentication using simplified driving simulator. In: Biometrics and Kansei Engineering (ICBAKE), 2011 International
Conference on. IEEE; 2011. pp. 71–76.
Nakanishi, I., Baba, S., Ozaki, K., Li, S., 2013. Using brain waves as
transparent biometrics for on–demand driver authentication. Int. J.
Biometrics 5 (3), 288–305.
Pais-Vieira, M., Lebedev, M., Kunicki, C., Wang, J., Nicolelis, M.A.,
2013. A brain-to-brain interface for real-time sharing of sensorimotor information. Sci. Rep. 3.
Panoulas, K.J., Hadjileontiadis, L.J., Panas, S.M. Brain–computer
interface (BCI): types, processing perspectives and applications. In:
Multimedia Services in Intelligent Environments. Springer; 2010.
pp. 299–321.
Revett, K, Deravi, F, Sirlantzis, K., 2010. Biosignals for user
authentication-towards cognitive biometrics? In: Emerging Security
Technologies (EST), International Conference on. IEEE; 2010. pp
71–76.
Ruiz, Sergio, 2014. Real-time fMRI brain computer interfaces: selfregulation of single brain regions to networks. Biol. Psychol. 95, 4–
20.
Sleight, Jason, Pillai, Preeti, Mohan, Shiwali, 2009. Classification of
executed and imagined motor movement EEG signals. University
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, pp. 1–10.
Upreti, Nikhita, Sharma, Aabha, Bali, Divya, 2014. BCI-for-communication-and-control. Int. J. Innovat. Res. Technol. 1 (4), 72–75.
ISSN: 2349–6002.
Wolpaw, Jonathan R., 2002. Brain-computer interfaces for communication and control. Clin. Neurophysiol. 113.6, 767–791, pp 767791.
Zander, Thorsten O., Sabine Jatzev, 2009. Detecting affective covert
user states with passive brain-computer interfaces. In: 3rd International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction and Workshops. IEEE, 2009. pp 1–9.

Please cite this article in press as: Pattnaik, P.K., Sarraf, J. Brain Computer Interface issues on hand movement. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jksuci.2016.09.006

