Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Biomedical Signal Processing and Control
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/bspc

Removal of EOG artefacts by combining wavelet neural network and
independent component analysis
Christiaan Burger ∗ , David Jacobus van den Heever 1
Department of Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering, Private Bag X1, Matieland 7602, South Africa

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 5 June 2014
Received in revised form 14 August 2014
Accepted 23 September 2014
Available online 14 October 2014

a b s t r a c t
Eye activity has larger electrical potential than the average electroencephalogram (EEG) recording, thus
making it one of the major sources of artefacts. Ocular artefacts (OA) must be removed as completely
as possible with little or no loss of EEG to obtain a higher quality EEG. Using independent component
analysis (ICA), the EEG is separated into independent components (IC) and the contaminated component
is removed, thus removing the OA. However, ICA does not separate the sources completely and some of
the meaningful EEG is lost. In this paper, a new method combining ICA and wavelet neural networking
(WNN) is proposed. In this method, WNN is applied to the contaminated ICs, correcting the OA and thus
lowering the data lost. The method was evaluated using simulated and real datasets and the results show
that the OA are successfully removed with very little data loss.
© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

1. Introduction
There exist many signal sources known as artefacts that lower
the quality of electroencephalography (EEG). Among all the artefacts, ocular artefacts (OA) are the most dominant. OA exist through
eye movements and blinks which generates a signal greater in
magnitude than EEG signals, allowing it to travel throughout the
scalp, masking and distorting EEG signals [1–4]. In order to obtain
higher quality EEG signals, these artefacts must be removed without distorting or removing any of the underlying EEG data. There
are numerous methods to restrict OA. One of the simpler methods
is restricting the eye movements and blinking of the subject by ﬁxating on a stable point. However, during experiments it is difﬁcult
for the subject to perform this task especially for infants or persons
with certain disabilities. Also, the effort of performing the task can
have a signiﬁcant impact on the acquired EEG data [5]. Another
method is to recognize and remove contaminated trials from the
study. Contaminated trials are recognized by detecting spike like
signals with magnitudes greater than the EEG signal. The removal
of these contaminated trials will however lead to loss of EEG data.
Many complex methods for detecting and removing artefacts
have been proposed. One such method, known as independent
component analysis (ICA), makes use of blind source separation

∗ Corresponding author. Tel.: +27 825705754.
E-mail addresses: cburger@sun.ac.za (C. Burger), dawie@sun.ac.za
(D.J. van den Heever).
1
Tel.: +27 835568311.

[4,6] to determine the original sources (or an estimate of the
sources) of a set of signals where each signal is assumed to be a
linear mixture of the sources. There exist different assumptions,
such as non-Gaussian (NG), non-stationary (NS), spectral density
(SD), and hybrid for the static model of the sources [7]. For this
article an assumption was made that the signals are NG (sources
are independent processes) and from [7,8] it was determined that
INFOMAX, NG ICA tool, produces the best results assisting with OA
removal and source separation thus it will be used throughout this
article.
ICA has become a popular method in removing artefacts from
EEG data. This is accomplished through removal of the component
(source) containing the artefact and remixing remaining sources.
The disadvantage of ICA is that the components do not necessarily
only contain artefact data, but also contains underlying EEG data
[2]. Removing the contaminated component will thus lead to loss
of EEG data. Addressing this issue, Wang et al. [4] combined ICA
and a system identiﬁcation technique to correct the contaminated
component. The system identiﬁcation technique, auto-regressive
exogenous (ARX) uses a short period of clean EEG before the contamination as reference EEG for correction.
Another method known as wavelet thresholding, based on
wavelet transform, uses wavelets or wavelet packets to decompose
a signal into sets of coefﬁcients which represents the original signal
in time and frequency domains. In the low-frequency sub-bands,
large coefﬁcients are produced if an OA is present in the original
signal. These large coefﬁcients are then decreased by a linear or
nonlinear threshold to remove the OA [9]. The decomposition of
the signal into detailed coefﬁcients is a great advantage because

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bspc.2014.09.009
1746-8094/© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

68

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

it can isolate all types of waveform structure in time and space.
Using this property, methods have been developed to automatically
detect and label OAs [1,3,10].
Neural networks (modelled after biological nervous system) are
computational models that consist of an input layer, hidden layers
and an output layer. The hidden layers consist of processing elements called neurons that are interconnected. These elements can
be trained for speciﬁc functions such as signal correction or classiﬁcation by changing the weights of the elements to obtain a speciﬁc
input–output relationship. Neural network have been trained to

detect and remove OA that are present in EEG [11,12]. Nguyen et al.
[9] developed a wavelet neural network (WNN) algorithm, combining the powerful estimation characteristics of neural networks and
the time–frequency properties of wavelet transforms. Experimental results on real and simulated EEG datasets proved promising.
In this paper, an ocular artefact removal method is introduced
that combines ICA and WNN. EEG data is decomposed into ICs and
wavelet transform is used to detect contaminated ICs. Wavelet
coefﬁcients are generated from the detected OA and the lowest frequency band outlier coefﬁcients are corrected by a trained

Fig. 1. The ﬂow diagram for detecting ocular artefacts. There are 4 primary steps: (a) decompose EEG signals; (b) reconstruct approximate coefﬁcients; (c) compare maximum
values against threshold and (c) centre OA in 1 s segment data.

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

69

Fig. 2. The ﬂow diagram for ICA-WNN ocular atifact correction. There are 5 steps: (a) ICA decomposition; (b) contaminated IC determined; (c) OA detection; (d) WNN
correction and (e) EEG reconstructed.

neural network. Patterns related only to OA will be rejected and
the underlying EEG data will be unaltered.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
In this paper the simulated data was used to test the performance of the ICA-WNN correction whereas the EEG dataset was
used to validate it.
2.1.1. Simulated EEG
The EEG signal generator model utilized in [13] was originally
designed for research on the effects caused by drugs such as anaesthetics on humans and focuses on 3 areas. Firstly the EEG simulation
assists with understanding the brain and how it functions. Secondly EEG simulation provides a means for which algorithms and
equipment can be tested. Lastly EEG simulation can be used for
educational or training purposes [13]. The EEG simulation model
was used to simulate artefact free EEG data.
In order to contaminate the simulated EEG data, OA had to be
recorded. Contaminated EEG data was recorded for 5760-points
(45 s) by a 14 channel Emotiv epoc (Emotiv, San Francisco, USA)
system at a sampling rate of 128 Hz. Markers were placed at each

instant an OA occurred. Considering that OA are situated in the
lower frequency band, the recorded data was reﬁned by applying
a band-pass ﬁlter (FIR, 0-4 Hz) and then broken into ICs using infomax, a blind source separation method [8]. OA at each marker was
extracted from the ICs that were identiﬁed for containing OA.
Contaminated simulated EEG were generated by randomly mixing the extracted OA from ICs with the artefact free simulated EEG.
Using the clean and contaminated simulated EEG the WNN were
trained and its performance was quantitatively evaluated.

2.1.2. EEG dataset
The ICA-WNN method was validated using data recorded in
a motor imagery test [14]. The EEG data was recorded from 7
healthy subjects that took part in 11 different experiments. The
data was collected using 128 channels sampled at 1000 Hz and
band-passed ﬁltered between 0.05 and 200 Hz. Subjects were
seated in a comfortable chair with arms relaxed on the armrest.
During the experiment, for 3 s, 2, 3 or 6 letters appeared on a
computer screen indicating to the subject what action they should
imagine i.e., imagining a left hand movement action or an auditory
sensation. Two types of visual stimulations were used to indicate
the required action. Firstly the letters were indicated at a stable,
ﬁxed point, minimizing OA. Secondly the letters were indicated at
random points on the screen inducing OA. Due to the lack of OA,

70

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

Fig. 3. Clean, contaminated and correct simulated signal for (a) training and (b)
testing of the WNN. The blue circles represents the original simulated signal, the
green crosses represents the contaminated simulated signal, and the red solid line
represents the corrected signal. (For interpretation of the references to color in this
ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

datasets that were recorded using the ﬁrst stimulus method were
not used in validating the WNN.
2.2. Methods
2.2.1. Independent component analysis in ocular artefact removal
The goal of ICA is to determine the independent source signals
from a mixture of signals that have been mixed linearly by a full
ranked mixing matrix [4,15–17]:
x(t) = As(t)

(1)

where s(t) represents the source signals, x(t) represents the mixture of source signals and A is the full ranked mixing matrix. To
determine the source signals or the full ranked mixing signals information is required of either one to determine the other, as seen in
equation Eq. (1), but this information is unknown. To overcome this
obstacle, ICA uses blind source separation to determine the unmixing matrix W, which in turn decomposes the mixed signals into
temporally independent components, as seen in Eq. (2).
s(t) = Wx(t)

(2)

Fig. 4. PSD of clean, contaminated and correct simulated signal for (a) training and
(b) testing of the WNN. The blue circles represents the original simulated signal, the
green crosses represents the contaminated simulated signal, and the red solid line
represents the WNN corrected signal. (For interpretation of the references to color
in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

As mentioned in Section 1, INFOMAX is based on the assumption
that all sources are NG but further assumptions are made such as
the neural electrical recordings are stationary, the sources are independent, and the number of sources match the number of recording
channels [17]. Using INFOMAX, the independent components are
determined from the recorded data and the components containing the artefacts are removed (zeroed). Using the mixing matrix
(A) and the corrected components (s) the recorded data is recreated free of any artefacts using (1). However this is not the true
EEG data. As mentioned previously, the independent sources are
not the true sources but are still a mixture of sources. Thus completely removing components will lead to a loss in underlying EEG
data.
2.2.2. Detecting ocular artefacts using wavelet transform
Wavelet transform is the decomposition of a signal using
wavelets, which consists of functions known as mother wavelets,
into a set of coefﬁcients which represents the signal in time and frequency domains. These coefﬁcients are determined by expanding,
contracting and shifting the mother wavelet over the desired signal
and creating basic functions. During the decomposition of the signal the coefﬁcients are generated in sets, high and low frequency.

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

71

Fig. 5. Simulated contaminated component of 10 s and the corrected component using WNN. The green crosses represent the contaminated component and the solid red
line represents the WNN corrected component. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

Fig. 6. PSD of the simulated component, contaminated component, and the corrected component using WNN. The blue circles represents the original simulated component,
the green crosses represents the contaminated component and the solid red line represents the WNN corrected component. (For interpretation of the references to color in
this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

For example, if a 0–30 Hz signal is decomposed into 3 levels there
will be coefﬁcients representing 0–10 Hz, 10–20 Hz and 20–30 Hz.
Using wavelet transform, Krishnaveni et al. [3] detects OA by
decomposing EEG using the Haar wavelet (up to level 6) and reconstructing the approximate coefﬁcients at level 6 which results in step
functions. This paper uses the same method up to and including the
reconstruction. As seen in Fig. 1, after the coefﬁcients are reconstructed, the pattern of rising and then falling edges are labelled
as possible artefacts and the time range of the occurrence is noted.

The maximum value of the original EEG signal within the time range
is compared against a threshold. If the maximum value is greater
than the threshold, the OA is centred in a 1 s window and labelled
as an OA. The threshold was determined from the recorded data in
Section 2.1.1 by

1
TH =
3

 m
1

OAMAX
m


(3)

72

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

Fig. 7. Frequency correlation between (a) original simulated component and the WNN corrected component and (b) contaminated component and the WNN corrected
component.

where OAMAX represents the maximum amplitude of the blink, m
represents the maximum number of blinks in the contaminated
IC, and TH is the threshold value. The average maximum OA value
was reduced by a third due to some outlier OAs that were present.
During testing it was observed that the current threshold did not
produce accurate results thus the threshold had to be determined
for each dataset using Eq. (3).
2.2.3. Correcting ocular artefacts with wavelet neural network
Nguyen et al. [9] introduced a new method to correct OA in
online EEG data with very little time delay and processing power
needed. By combining the advantages of both neural networks
and wavelet transforms they introduced the WNN. In order to
train the WNN, artefact free simulated EEG signals were generated

and contaminated signals were produced by adding real ﬁlterextracted artefacts to the simulated EEG signals. Both signals were
then decomposed up to level 8 using coif3 mother wavelet. The
low-frequency sets were then interpolated, to ensure same vector
length, and combined as a training dataset. Using a weight optimization backpropagation algorithm and the training dataset, the
WNN was trained to correct OA.
Using the trained WNN they decomposed the signals using a
coif3 mother wavelet and depending on the dataset, the level of
decomposition was determined through experimentation due to
the unknown number of OA that will be present. After decomposing the signal into its coefﬁcients, the neural network corrects
these outlier coefﬁcients in the low frequency band thus removing the OA. The WNN does not only remove the OA but also over

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

73

Fig. 8. Identiﬁed components containing EOG artefacts for (a) subject 1 and (b) subject 2. The solid green line represents the contaminated component and the solid red line
represents the WNN corrected component. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.)

corrects the low frequency band, thus low frequency EEG data is
lost.
In this paper, artefact free and contaminated signals were generated using the same methods as described in [9]. OAs and their
artefact free counterparts were extracted in 1 s windows (Section
2.2.2). Both were decomposed up to level 8 using a coif3 mother
wavelet and the lowest frequency band was interpolated to generate more training data. The interpolated data of both signals are
combined as the training dataset for each OA. Because only one OA
is present in the window, it is forced into the lowest frequency band
thus a 1-6-1 (1 input unit, 6 hidden layer, and 1 output unit) is used.
Using a backpropagation algorithm the WNN was trained with each

OA training dataset until desired performance was accomplished.
OAs has small differences from subject to subject such as duration and amplitude but the shape of the OA stays constant, a large
spike like activity. This allows the WNN to be trained with only one
dataset with numerous OAs thus determining the average values
of the coefﬁcients and decreasing the preparation time.
2.2.4. Correction of IC by applying WNN
It is apparent that using ICA or WNN for artefact correction,
underlying EEG or low frequency cerebral data may be lost. In order
to reduce the data loss of each method, they are combined in an
artefact removal procedure. As seen in Fig. 2, the contaminated

74

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

Fig. 9. PSD of the identiﬁed components containing EOG artefacts and the WNN corrected components for (a) subject 1 and (b) subject 2. The green crosses represents the
contaminated component and the solid red line represents the WNN corrected component. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of the article.)

EEG data is decomposed into ICs using ICA. Using visual inspection the contaminated IC is determined and the method in Section
2.2.2 is used to mark the OAs and extracts a 1 s window with the OA
in the centre. All the extracted windows containing OAs are then
corrected one at a time by the WNN. The marked OAs in the contaminated IC are then replaced with the 1 s window of corrected
data. Finally all the ICs are recombined to create an OA free EEG.
2.2.5. Performance metrics
In order to determine whether the method is successful at
removing OA from EEG, the performance is assessed using power
spectral density (PSD), root mean square error (RMSE), and frequency correlation.

PSD is used to evaluate the frequency content of a signal. In
this paper, PSD of the EEG signals are computed using a nonparametric method known as the Welch method. The method is based
on averaging a periodogram spectrum data over overlapping data
segments.
Jung [18] states that the correlation in the time domain before
and after ﬁltering is equivalent to the correlation in the frequency
domain before and after artefact removal. Frequency correlation
between x̃ and ỹ can be determined by

w2
c = 0.5 ∗



w1

(x̃∗ ỹ + ỹ∗ x̃)

w2
x̃x̃∗
w1

∗

w2
w1

ỹỹ∗

(4)

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

75

Fig. 10. Frequency correlation between the identiﬁed contaminated component and the WNN corrected component for (a) subject 1 and (b) subject 2.

where x̃∗ and ỹ∗ are the conjugate complex of x̃ and ỹ, w1 and w2
are the lower and upper limits of the interested spectrum region
and c is the correlation value. The value of c will be between 0 and
1 if x̃ and ỹ are not identical but if they are c will obtain a 1. For
computational efﬁciency the window size (w2 − w1 ) was chosen as
2.
RMSE represents the difference between two signals. The
smaller the difference is between two signals the smaller the RMSE
value becomes. The RMSE will be used to determine the accuracy
of the ICA-WNN method and is deﬁned as



1
RMSE = 

Nv

Nv

(EEGAR − EEGAF )2
1

(5)

where EEGAR and EEGAF are artefact removed EEG and artefact free
EEG and Nv is the length of the contaminated EEG signal.
3. Results
In the section below the results that were obtained during training and testing of only the WNN are presented. Afterwards, in
Section 3.2, the ICA-WNN results are shown.
3.1. Simulated EEG
As mentioned, the WNN corrects OA in IC by correcting a 1 s
segment of data containing the OA. Using an EEG signal generator, different 1 s (256-points) artefact free segments was generated

76

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

Fig. 11. Contaminated channel Fp1 and ICA-WNN corrected channel FP1 for (a) subject 1 and (b) subject 2. The solid green line represents the contaminated channel and the
solid red line represents the ICA-WNN corrected channel. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of the
article.)

at a sampling rate of 256 Hz. OA were recorded using the Emotiv Epoc system at a sampling rate of 128 Hz. Different OAs were
extracted, resampled and inserted into each segment of data. Data
in Fig. 3(a) were used to train the WNN using a resilient backpropagation algorithm. Fig. 3(b) shows the segment testing data that was
chosen from the different segments generated as well as the corrected testing signal. Fig. 4 shows the PSD of clean, contaminated
and corrected data segments for training and testing and Table 1
shows the RMSE values.
After the WNN corrects the 1 s data segment, it replaces the contaminated OA segment in the IC. To test the accuracy of the method,
a 10 s (2560-points) single IC was generated at a sampling rate of
256 Hz. OAs that were resampled were inserted into the signal and

thus contaminating it. The contaminated and corrected testing signal is shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 6 shows the PSD of clean, contaminated
and corrected data segments of the testing signal. The frequency
correlation among the simulated data for testing is shown in Fig. 7
and the difference between the clean and corrected signals are
shown in Table 1 as an RMSE value.
Table 1
The RMSE values for both 1 s and 10 s segments.
RMSE

1 s segment

10 s segment

Training
Testing

8.6605
9.0746

NA
5.3731

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

77

Fig. 12. PSD of the contaminated channel Fp1 and ICA-WNN corrected channel FP1 for (a) subject 1 and (b) subject 2. The green crosses represent the contaminated channel
and the solid red line represents the ICA-WNN corrected channel. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version
of the article.)

3.2. EEG dataset
The motor imagery test collected data using 128 channels at
a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. Two data sets (subjects 1 and 4)
were chosen to evaluate the system due to its abundance of OA
present. These two data sets were then divided into 30 s (30,000point) data segments to improve computational efﬁciency. Channel
AFp1 from subject 1 s data was rejected due to it having a bad
connection.
ICA was applied to determine the ICs and afterwards visual
inspection, based on waveform and topographic information, was
conducted to determine the contaminated IC. It was concluded that

IC 1 was contaminated with OA for both subjects. Fig. 8 shows the
contaminated IC1 and its correction for both subjects. The PSD of
the contaminated and corrected IC for both subjects is shown in
Fig. 9 and their frequency correlation in Fig. 10.
Electrodes located in the prefrontal lobe are the most effected by
OA due to its location so close to the eyes. Taking this into account,
channel Fp1 is chosen to monitor the effects ICA correction has
on the EEG data. Fig. 11 shows a channel Fp1 contaminated and
corrected signal for both subjects. The PSD of the contaminated
and corrected channel for both subjects is shown in Fig. 12 and
their frequency correlation in Fig. 13.

78

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

Fig. 13. Frequency correlation between the contaminated channel Fp1 and the ICA-WNN corrected channel Fp1 for (a) subject 1 and (b) subject 2.

4. Discussion
The present paper introduced a method in OA removal by combining ICA and WNN. The aim of the method is to correct OA that
are present in IC, thus eliminating OA from the EEG data with very
little data loss of underlying cerebral activity.
Simulated signals are used to evaluate the method on a quantitative level because it is unknown what the true artefact free
EEG is when dealing with contaminated datasets. Fig. 3 shows that
the WNN successfully corrects the OA segment. However, sometimes the low frequency range can be overcorrected, as seen in
Fig. 4. The cause of this phenomenon originates from the extraction of the OA from the IC. The OA extracted still contained some
low frequency data after ﬁltering. The same observation was made

by Nguyen et al. [9] thus to minimize the overcorrection effect,
small segments of data containing the OA are corrected using the
WNN.
Fig. 5 shows that only the OA and small extra segments of data
is changed thus preserving most of the original signal. Figs. 6 and 7
show that the overcorrection of the low frequency band has
decreased a substantial amount when comparing it to Fig. 4.
Nguyen et al. [9] applied both wavelet thresholding technique and
the WNN to a 5 s signal containing 3 OAs. The wavelet threshold
technique dramatically reduced the low frequency band (almost
30 dB drop) from the clean simulated signal. The WNN, applied to
the entire signal, slightly overcorrected the signal (almost 10 dB
drop). From Fig. 6 it is clear that the WNN applied to small segments of data improves the overall performance having almost the

C. Burger, D.J. van den Heever / Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 15 (2015) 67–79

exact PSD as that of the clean simulated signal thus preserving the
signal in all frequencies.
Nguyen et al. [9] reported that the RMSE during training and
testing of the WNN were determined to be 11.2389 and 12.2473.
As seen in Table 1 for training and testing of both 1 s and 10 s data
segments RMSE were decreased. The 10 s signal, where only segments were corrected, has the lowest RMSE which shows that this
method increases the accuracy of the WNN. An issue that occurs
and can change the results presented is the mother wavelet used
to decompose the signal. If correct mother wavelet not chosen it
can decrease the accuracy of the system when applied to EEG data.
After the simulation study the ICA-WNN method was tested
on data consisting of 7 healthy subjects. Similar to the simulation
results, the results show that all OA are correct in the IC (Fig. 8).
Figs. 9 and 10 reinforce the results obtained for the simulation data.
It is clear that applying WNN to small segments of data that contains
an OA preserves the low frequency cerebral activity and preserves
all other frequencies, thus reducing the amount of data loss.
After reconstruction of the corrected IC it is shown in Fig. 11
that the OA have been removed from the EEG. Figs. 12 and 13
indicate that the OA have been removed from the EEG data while
preserving the low frequency cerebral activity as well as underlying activity present in the contaminated IC. The ICA-WNN method
is an improvement because only applying ICA [9] changes the signals PSD over the entire frequency spectrum whereas applying only
WNN overcorrects the low frequency band. Note that in the range
of 0–1 Hz there still exist a peak. This peak is due to the large low
frequency activity present in Fig. 11. Thus, the ICA-WNN method
successfully removes OA from EEG data with minimal data loss due
to minimizing the overcorrection of low frequency data as well as
correcting IC instead of completely removing the IC.
The WNN overcorrection of low frequency data allows it to correct eye movements without the need to train it. This is only true
when the entire signal is corrected with the WNN. In the future, OA
detection algorithms must be reﬁned to detect not only eye blinks
but eye movement artefacts as well. WNN must then be trained for
both eye blinks and eye movement artefacts.
5. Conclusions
An IC correction method using a WNN was proposed in order
to remove OA. A combination of ICA, neural network and wavelet
transform was used to detect and remove OA. The results from the
simulation and motor imagery data set show that the OA can be
successfully removed with minimal data loss.

79

Acknowledgements
This project was funded by NRF. The authors would like to thank
Dornhege et al [14] for making their EEG data publicly available.
References
[1] S. Ramanan, N. Kalpakam, J. Sahambi, A Novel Wavelet Based Technique for
Detection and De-noising of Ocular Artifact in Normal and Epileptic Electroencephalogram, 2004, pp. 180–183.
[2] C. Joyce, I. Gorodnitsky, M. Kutas, Automatic removal of eye movement and
blink artifacts from EEG data using blind component separation, Psychophysiology 41 (2004) 313–325.
[3] V. Krishnaveni, S. Jayaraman, S. Aravind, V. Hariharasudhan, K. Ramadoss, Automatic Identiﬁcation and Removal of Ocular Artifacts from EEG using Wavelet
Transform, Meas. Sci. Rev. 6 (4) (2006) 45–57.
[4] Z. Wang, P. Xu, T. Liu, Y. Tian, X. Lei, D. Yao, Robust removal of ocular artifacts by combining independent component analysis and system identiﬁcation,
Biomed. Signal Process. Control 10 (March) (2014) 250–259.
[5] M. Garcia, M. Thomlinson, J. Lopez, B. Jervis, C. Mair, Residual ocular artefact subsequent to ocular artefact removal from the electroencephalogram, IEE
Proc. – Sci. Meas. Technol. 146 (November) (1999) 293–298.
[6] M.a. Klados, C. Papadelis, C. Braun, P.D. Bamidis, REG-ICA: a hybrid methodology combining blind source separation and regression techniques for the
rejection of ocular artifacts, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 6 (July) (2011)
291–300.
[7] M. Kirkove, C. François, J. Verly, Comparative evaluation of existing and new
methods for correcting ocular artifacts in electroencephalographic recordings,
Signal Process. 98 (2014) 102–120.
[8] A. Delorme, J. Plamer, R. Oostenveld, Comparing Results of Algorithms Implementing Blind Source Separation of EEG Data, Swartz Foundation and NIH,
2007.
[9] H.-A.T. Nguyen, J. Musson, F. Li, W. Wang, G. Zhang, R. Xu, C. Richey, T. Schnell,
F.D. McKenzie, J. Li, EOG artifact removal using a wavelet neural network, Neurocomputing 97 (November) (2012) 374–389.
[10] M. Kiamini, S. Alirezaee, B. Perseh, M. Ahmadi, A wavelet based algorithm
for ocular artifact detection in the EEG signals, in: IEEE INMIC 2008: 12th
IEEE International Multitopic Conference – Conference Proceedings, 2008, pp.
165–168.
[11] B. Chambayil, R. Singla, R. Jha, EEG eye blink classiﬁcation using neural network,
Proc. World Congr. Eng. I (2010) 2–5.
[12] V. Krishnaveni, Automatic removal of ocular artifacts using JADE algorithm and
neural network, Int. J. Biomed. Sci. 2 (2007) 1110–1121.
[13] N.A. de Beer, W.L. van Meurs, M.B. Grit, M.L. Good, D. Gravenstein, Educational
simulation of the electroencephalogram (EEG), Technol. Health Care: Off. J. Eur.
Soc. Eng. Med. 9 (January) (2001) 237–256.
[14] J. Donoghue, B. Blankertz, G. Curio, K. Muller, Boosting bit rates in non-invasive
EEG single trial classiﬁcation by feature combination and multi class paradigm,
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 51 (2004) 993–1002.
[15] H. Ghandeharion, A. Erfanian, A fully automatic ocular artifact suppression
from EEG data using higher order statistics: improved performance by wavelet
analysis, Med. Eng. Phys. 32 (2010) 720–729.
[16] A. Hyvärinen, E. Oja, Independent component analysis: algorithms and applications, Neural Netw. 13 (2000) 411–430.
[17] S. Sanei, J. Chambers, EEG Signal Processing, 2008.
[18] A. Jung, Statistical Analysis of Biomedical Data, 2004.

