Digital Communications and Networks (2015) 1, 229–252

HOSTED BY

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/dcan

Cognitive assisted living ambient system:
a survey
Ruijiao Lia,b,n, Bowen Lua,c,1, Klaus D. McDonald-Maiera
a

School of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester
CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom
b
Amy Robotics Co. Ltd., Room 329, 319 Shengjia Road, Xiacheng, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310004, China
c
Aeronautical and Automotive Engineering, Loughborough University, Loughborough LE11 3TU, United
Kingdom
Received 30 June 2015; received in revised form 26 October 2015; accepted 27 October 2015
Available online 12 November 2015

1.

KEYWORDS

Abstract

Assitive living;
Digital communication;
Smart home;
Robotics;
Sensor network

The demographic change towards an aging population is creating a signiﬁcant impact and
introducing drastic challenges to our society. We therefore need to ﬁnd ways to assist older people
to stay independently and prevent social isolation of these population. Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) provide various solutions to help older adults to improve their quality of
life, stay healthier, and live independently for a time. Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) is a ﬁeld to
investigate innovative technologies to provide assistance as well as healthcare and rehabilitation to
impaired seniors. The paper provides a review of research background and technologies of AAL.
& 2015 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Production and Hosting by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Introduction

coming years [1]. The number of people aged 65 or older is
projected to grow from an estimated 524 million in 2010 to
nearly 1.5 billion in 2050, with most of the increase in
developing countries [2]. Europe currently holds the highest
proportion of aging population. As the demographic statistics reports [3], the population over 60 years old is 24.5% of
the total of Europe. The growing number of older population
will be accompanied with rapid increase in number of
people with mental and physical impairments as well as
various age-related chronic disease such as hyperactivity
disorder, autism spectrum disorders and motor handicap as
well as various age-related chronic diseases like cognitive
decline[4].
According to [5], up to 19 million population give primary
assistance with daily activities to their older or dependent
relatives. 70% of individuals cannot live independently and

Population aging has become a global phenomenon as a
result of life longevity and declining birth rate of modern
society, especially in developed regions. The trend will be
more severe and cause larger impact on our society in the
n

Corresponding author at: School of Computer Science and
Electronic Engineering, University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park, Colchester CO4 3SQ, United Kingdom.
E-mail addresses: lirj@amyrobot.cn (R. Li),
B.Lu@lboro.ac.uk (B. Lu), kdm@essex.ac.uk (K.D. McDonald-Maier).
1
Bowen Lu was involved in this work during his postgraduate study
at University of Essex.
Peer review under responsibility of Chongqing University of Posts
and Telecommunications.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dcan.2015.10.003
2352-8648/& 2015 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Production and Hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access
article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

230
need activity assistance and healthcare from caregiver. In
2012, 15.4 million caregivers provided an estimated 17.5
billion hours of unpaid care, valued at more than $216
billion [6]. Costs of caring for people with Alzheimers and
other dementia as will cost from estimated $203 billion
from 2013 to a projected $1.2 trillion per year by 2050 in
the USA. In total, dementia is estimated to cost the UK £23
billion a year. It also indicates that the global cost of
dementia in 2010 at $604 billion which is 1% of global GDP
and it is likely that these costs will rise sharply in proportion
to the number of older people in the coming years [2].
Therefore, this phenomenon of continuously increasing of
older population will bring a huge burden and stress to the
families and society.
As a consequence of the increasingly aging population, it
is necessary to ﬁnd solutions to improve the living condition
and develop more robust, usable, safe but low cost healthcare systems to reduce the burden to society. ICT could play
a remarkable role to conquer this challenge. During recent
decades, the research on ICT-enabled support for independent living of older adults has been drawing great attention
from the communities and governments. There are many
potential areas where ICT can be signiﬁcant to counteract
the effects of population aging. The term of Ambient
Assisted Living becomes a ﬁeld to investigate innovative
technologies to provide assistance as well as health-care
and rehabilitation to senior people with impairment, especially for people with some cognitive impairment living on
their own. These innovative applications enable them to
live independently, comfortably, stately and stay healthily
throughout their lifespan, namely ageing well-being.
In the past years, AAL research has been adopted worldwide and became a very active research area. Europe Action
Plan for Aging Well and Europe AAL Joint Program has been
launched by the EU for cultivating the development of
innovative ICT-based products, services and systems for the
process of aging well at home, in the community and at
work, therefore improving the quality of life, the participation in social life, skills and the employability of older
people and reducing the costs of health and social care. A
wide variety of research projects has just delivered results
or is working on AAL. The outcome of these projects aim is
to achieve the overarching goal of the European Innovation
Partnership on Active and Healthy aging (EIP AHA), which by
2020 aims to increase the average healthy lifespan of
Europeans by 2 years. The Ubiquitous Korea Project are
long term projects supported by the government to improve
citizen's life especially for the aging and disabled people
[7].
The AALIANCE project presents a road-map for Ambient
Assisted Living which has signiﬁcant guidance and provides
various strategies for future research and development of
this area [8]. A collection of international conferences and
journals have focused on ambient assisted living and aging
well, such as International Conference on aging, Disability
and Independence (ICADI), International Conference on
Intelligent Environments (ICIE), AAAI Fall Symposium on
Caring Machines: AI in Elder-care, International Workshop
on Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL), and the journal of
Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments (JAIS). The
Handbook of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environment
[7] and the Handbook of Ambient Assisted Living [9]

R. Li et al.
aggregate the scientiﬁc and engineering contributions
related to ambient assisted living worldwide. Furthermore,
there have been more publications investigating the studies
on AAL and relevant technologies [10].
This survey paper aims to provide an one-stop view and
summary of the background of AAL research, especially the
technologies and approaches for cognitive assisted for aging
population in home environment. We will also explore
successful case studies and deployed systems. Finally, we
will identify the important current and future challenges.

2.

Scenarios and applications of AAL

AAL applications are targeted to accommodate the older or
the disabled to live independently and comfortably as long
as possible in their living environment. Living environments
are not only home, but also various environments such as
neighbourhood, shopping mall and other public places. AAL
applications consist of complex networks of heterogeneous
information appliances and smart artefacts which can assist
people with special need in several ways. In [8,11,12]
various scenarios and prototypes of AAL services for older
people are proposed. We summarise the scenarios of AAL
services into the following areas, daily task facilitation,
mobility assistance, health-care and rehabilitation, and
social inclusion and communication (Fig. 1).
In recent years the progress in ubiquitous computing,
wireless technologies, sensor networks, computing processing speeds, mobile services and robotics has essentially
sustained the development of AAL applications and makes
some envision reality in this area. The advancement of
artiﬁcial intelligence and the relevant approaches such as
context-awareness, agent-based technology, computer
vision, machine learning and so on have been investigated
to provide more intelligent, ﬂexible and natural services to
the users. Since the last decade, there are a number of
research projects targeted to address technologies to support daily life of older adults. Some of them have been
available for customers.

Fig. 1 Typical ambient assisted living environment scenarios:
smart home with sensors, appliances, network and computing
components, daily task assistance, heathcare, mobility
assistance.

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey

2.1.

231

Daily task facilitation in smart home

A smart home is a concept to describe living environment
with digital surroundings such as sensors, smart appliances,
networks and provides natural feel interactions with humans.
A smart home automation is capable of delivering convenient
and adaptive services to the dwellers, for instance, automatic actuator for lighting, air condition, temperature control, and food/drinking preparation. It is therefore often
used to support people with cognitive impairment who are
living independently. In a smart home, daily life activity
(DLA) monitoring is an essential component for assisted
living. Various digital devices, sensors, cameras, are
deployed into the smart environment to continuously monitor
and record the activities of dwellers. Activities of daily life
are recorded as a symbolic representation. A smart home
system can deliver adaptive services with regard to knowledge base of users' lifestyle. Such systems record users' daily
activities i.e. when to get up, when to go to sleep, if they
like listening radio or news after sleep, and so on. By
analysing and processing the recorded activities, the system
can recognise the users' habits and produce corresponding
services to them.
Service robots are envisaged to assist people with their
daily tasks or as part of assistance to the handicapped and
the elderly. Domestic robots or service robots are employed
to provide assistance for various daily situations, such as
fetching and carrying objects from ﬂoor, performing cleaning tasks, and emergency support.
There have been a number of smart home projects aimed
at assisted living in the world. In Asia, TRON project [13] is
an open project on intelligent living environment and
assistive technology. In Fig. 2 is TRON Intelligent House
established in Tokyo, Japan. The PAPI project and U-house
project were founded in Taiwan as part of the TRON project
[14]. The Ubiquitous Home [15] proposed and implemented
context-aware services in a real-life smart environment.
The Robotics Room and The Sensing Room by the University
of Tokyo [16] is another prototype of smart home system.
Within the TECNALIA's Health Technologies Unit [17],
there are many projects related to AAL. TECNALIA is the
largest private Research, Development and Innovation (RDI)
group in Spain and one of the leading ones in Europe after a
merging process of eight technology centres located in
Basque Country (Spain). It involves older people, people
with cognitive or physical disabilities, their relatives and
caregivers, clinical experts and medical professionals as
potential users in the project development.
The EasyLiving project [18] at Microsoft Research developed an architecture and technologies for intelligent environments. The EasyLiving system has evolved smart user
interface, dynamic device conﬁguration, remote control,
activities tracking which provides ﬂexible support user
interaction across a wide variety of tasks and modalities.
House_n [19,20] is a multi-disciplinary project lead by
researchers at the MIT Department of Architecture. This
project aimed at exploring how new technologies, materials
and strategies for design can make dynamic, evolving places
that respond to the complexities of life. It has focused on
developing new design tools, customisation and fabrication
strategies, sensing, and applications related to energy,
health, and communication. The project has resulted with

Fig. 2 Smart home prototype of TRON project.

some open source tools2 like Portable Place-Based Research
Tools, OPEN Prototype House Initiative, and Portable kit
within the Open Source Building Alliance.
The CASAS Smart Home3 project is a multi-disciplinary
research project at Washington State University. It focuses
on the creation of an intelligent home environment. In this
project, the smart home environment uses intelligent
agents, where the status of the residents and their physical
surroundings are perceived using sensors and the environment is acted upon using controllers in a way that improves
the comfort, safety, and/or productivity of the residents.
The developed smart home is an intelligent agent that
perceives its environment through sensors, and can act upon
the environment through the use of actuators. The system is
simple and lightweight so that the capabilities of the smart
home can be deployed, evaluated, and scaled accordingly
[21,22].
The Ambient Intelligence Research (AIR) Lab at Stanford
University focuses on research to develop techniques and
applications of ambient intelligence in smart homes and
ofﬁces and occupancy-aware smart buildings. A space in the
AIR lab is set up in the form of a smart room providing
natural settings of a living environment while offering an
ambient interface to its user through pervasive sensing,
processing, and communication. A network of sensing
devices is used to monitor work habits and social interactions of the workers, and adaptive personal recommendations are provided to them to promote ergonomic health
and social engagement in the smart home setting [23].
The Quality of Life Technology (QoLT) Centre4 is founded
by the US National Science Foundation (NSF) Engineering
Research Center (ERC) in Pittsburgh. The Center is jointly
run by Carnegie Mellon University and the University of
Pittsburgh. It focuses on the development of intelligent
systems and assistive technologies that enable older adults
and people with disabilities to live more independently.
From 2006 to present, they have carried out several
projects which address the needs and activities of everyday
living by prototyping personal assistive robots, cognitive and
behavioral coaches, human awareness and driver assistance

2

http://architecture.mit.edu/house_n/.
http://ailab.eecs.wsu.edu/casas/.
4
http://www.cmu.edu/qolt/.
3

232
technologies, and human-system interaction with a focus on
the social and clinical factors for deployment and adoption.
The Aware Home Research Initiative (AHRI) [24] at
Georgia Institute of Technology is a notable project in the
area of smart home (Fig. 3). The Aware Home is a 3-story,
5040 square foot facility designed to facilitate research,
while providing an authentic home environment. The technical components involved in the home include context
awareness and ubiquitous sensing, individual interaction
with the home and a smart ﬂoor. The project addresses
speciﬁc applications to older people in three aspects: First,
social connections between older parents and their adult
children promoting peace of mind for family members.
Second, support “everyday cognition” by augmenting those
aspects of memory that decline with age and planning
capabilities of older residents. Third, handling crisis situations so that appropriate outside services are notiﬁed.
MavHome [25] is a project in Washington State University
and University of Texas at Arlington in the USA (Fig. 4). They
proposed that a system of smart home that can record and
learn from the user's behavior and predicate corresponding
responses. The scenario of smart home is deﬁned as the
following:
At 6:45am, MavHome turns up the heat because it has
learned that the home needs 15 minutes to warm to
optimal waking temperature. At 7:00am, the alarm
sounds, then the bedroom light and kitchen coffee maker
turn on. The user steps into the bathroom and turns on
the light. MavHome records this interaction, displays the
morning news on the bathroom video screen, and turns
on the shower. When the user ﬁnishes grooming, the
bathroom light turns off while the kitchen light and
display turn on, and the news programme moves to the
kitchen screen. During breakfast, the user requests the
janitor robot to clean the house. When the user leaves
for work, MavHome secures the home, and starts the
lawn sprinklers despite knowing the 30% predicted
chance of rain. Because the refrigerator is low on milk
and cheese, MavHome places a grocery order. When the
user arrives home, their grocery order has arrived and
the hot tub is waiting for them.
Under the 6th and 7th European Framework Programme
during last decades, there have been a series of assisted
living projects carried out. Some notable projects include
ALADIN [26], iSpace [27], RoboCare [28], SYSIASS [29],
PERSONA Project [7], and LsW [30]. Within Europe Ambient
Assisted Living Joint Programme, there have been about one
hundred projects in the 5 consultation calls so far. The list
of the projects evolved in the joint programme can be found
in.5
ALADIN (Ambient Lighting Assistance for an Ageing Population) project proposed a magic lighting system for older
adults. The aim of this project is to develop an adaptive
lighting system with intelligent open-loop control, which can
adapt in response to the users need in various situations but
also provides smart eco-energy management. The dynamic
lighting system can beneﬁt the users' eye health, sleep
quality, mood, cognitive performance, even their metabolic
5

http://www.aal-europe.eu.

R. Li et al.

Fig. 3 Smart home prototype: Aware Home Research Initiative
(AHRI) at Georgia Institute of Technology [24].

Fig. 4

Smart home prototype of mavHome project [25].

system, especially to the people with chronic disorder and
vision impairment. This system enables the citizen with
mobility or other disability to operate environmental systems
and devices directly without moving physically to the actuator's location. It allows the user to control the devices by
looking directly by gaze-based interaction [26].
iDorm is one of the pioneering smart home research
projects in Europe. It is established by the Intelligent
Environment Group of Digital Lifestyle Centre at the University of Essex in the UK in 1999 [31]. This continuous
project has been upgraded to iSpace and has become an
excellent seed-bed for intelligent environment studies. The
iDorm is a multi-use (sleep, work, entertaining, and study)
intelligent inhabited environment equipped with different
normal furniture and embedded sensors. The space contains
three types of embedded computational components:

 Physically static computational component within the




building: It has embedded agent to receive sensor data
through the network, to learn the user's behavior and to
make decisions for the control actions.
Robotic agent: A mobile service robot agent with features
like adaptive navigation, communication with static
embedded agents via wireless network.
Portable computational devices: Wearable sensors and
PDA for wireless interaction with the iDorm.

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey
The system of iDorm is based on an incremental synchronous learning architecture and fuzzy logic controllers (FLC).
Each FLC forms a behavior, while dynamic behaviors learned
from users and ﬁxed behaviors by pre-deﬁned programmes.
FLCs are suitable for complex and dynamic lifelong learning
of user's behavior. For the agents, they communicate with
each other by exchanging XML-formatted queries within the
network.
RoboCare [32] by ISTC-CNR is prototype of integrated
home environment named RDE (RoboCare Domestic Environment) with cognitive support to improve the everyday life
of older people at home. The RDE is a distributed multiagent system in which coordinated operation of agents
provide various services:

 A mobile service robot: Robotic service is the key feature
of RoboCare.

 Interaction manager (IM): The service robot acts as a





cognitive mediator in the system, which can interact with
users and internal algorithms, and this interaction process is controlled by the IM. The IM has two submodules,
speech synthesis module (Lucia) and speech recognition
module (Sonic). These two modules allow user to interact
with the robot via speech.
People Localisation and Tracking (PLT) agent: PLT service is
based on a stereo vision sensor. This consists of the
following three submodules: (1) Background modelling
module, background subtraction and foreground segmentation for foreground people and objects detection. (2) Planview analysis of position and appearance models. (3) Tracking module for observation over time maintaining association between tracks and tracked people or objects.
People posture recognition (PPR) service: PPR agent
relies on the person-blob obtained by PLT and deﬁned
3D body model. It is capable of distinguishing several

Fig. 5

233





major postures, such as “standing”, “sitting”, and “laying”, etc.
Activities of Daily Living (ADL) monitor: The purpose of
ADL is to analyse and schedule tasks and behavior in the
system. A schedule management environment is developed for ALD, in which the schedule representation is
based on a temporal constraint network (TNC).
Personal data assistant (PDA) agent.

As the RoboCare system combines various distributed agents
to assist the user's life. It requires coordination service to
manipulate the multiple agents. To deal with the coordination,
ADOPTN, an extension of the ADOPT (Asynchronous Distributed
Optimisation) algorithm is utilised.
PERSONA [33] is a collaborative AAL project for the
ageing society founded by EU with 12 partners from Italy,
Spain, Germany, Greece, Norway and Denmark (Fig. 5). It
aims to develop sustainable and affordable solution for the
independent living of senior people with AAL technology.
With regard to the need of elderly independence, the
project is divided into four categories:

 AAL services supporting social inclusion and experience
exchange.

 AAL services supporting older users in their daily life
activities.

 AAL services supporting older people to feel more con

ﬁdent, safe, and secure, and helping their relatives to
manage risky situation.
AAL services fostering mobility and supporting older
people outside their home.

A scalable open Distributed System (PERSONA platform)
for supporting context-awareness of AAL space was developed as a result of this project. The platform provides a
middleware that supports seamless connectivity and seman-

Summary of PERSONA context awareness framework for AAL [33].

234

R. Li et al.

tic interoperability for self-organisation of physical and
logical architecture. It also allows re-conﬁguration of platform components such as the Situation Reasoner, the
Dialogue Manager, and the Services Orchestrator. The
architecture of PERSONA platform is composed of the
following components:
 Interoperable framework provides an event-based class
of buses and a call-based service for communication and
speciﬁcation of context.
 Some of the services in the PERSONA platform:
1. Dialogue Manger (DM) for handling the system-wide
dialogues and hiding the complexity of utilising the
application service from user.
2. Context History Entrepot (CHE) for gathering the
history of all context events and guaranteeing the
essential support to reasoners.
3. Situation Reasoner (SR) that uses the database of CHE
and infers new contextual information with RDF and
SPARQL.
4. Service Orchestrator (SO) for interpreting the metadata, describing a composite service and performing
the instructions within it.
5. Proﬁle Component for guaranteeing the adaptability of
the AAL system and managing the user proﬁles.
6. Privacy-aware and Security Manager (PISM) for controlling the access to services in the middle-ware.
7. AAL-Space Gateway for remote accessing to the hosted
service with a ﬁxed URL.
 The middle-ware has three layers: The Abstract Connection Layer (ACL) is the lowest layer which responses to
the peer-to-peer connectivity between the middle-ware
instances. The second layer, the Sodapop layer implements the peer and listener interfaces from ACL and
registers as the local peer to all connectors found. The
top layer is a PERSONA-speciﬁc layer, which implements
the input, output, context, and service buses with
distributed strategies using an RDF serializer for the
exchange of message among peers.
 The Ontological Model provides a framework for sharing
knowledge and resource handling within the distributed
system. Three elementary tools based on ontology are
developed in PERSONA platform: the knowledge representation technologies of the Semantic Web consist of RDF and
OWL; an upper ontology with appropriate programming
support consisting of those concepts that all users of the
middle-ware used; a general conceptual solution with a
certain set of shared tools for integrating thin devices and
embedded sensors, and transforming the tapped data into
an appropriate ontological presentation.
 Sensors Abstraction and Integration Layer (SAIL) for sensing the environment and user is composed of stationary,
portable and wearable components. Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is applied for sensing tasks. Within PERSONA, a
ZigBee based network is developed to integrate and
handle the WSN and other sensing components [33].

2.2.

Healthcare and rehabilitation

Health plays a major role in the life of older people
suffering from chronic diseases like diabetes, dementia

and the other cognitive or physical impairments. Simplifying
the treatment of those diseases not only eases their everyday life, but can also increase their personal safety by
ensuring automatic alarms in case of a deteriorating health
status. Living alone often causes fear of having an accident
and being unable to call for help. This includes falls,
accidents in the kitchen, but also general safety e.g. when
leaving the home. It is therefore important to provide the
elderly with tools, which support them regarding these
issues and which, in case they cannot call for help on their
own, automatically call for assistance.
With declining support from families, society will need
better information and tools to ensure the well-being of
the of the growing number of elderly citizens. It has been
a burgeoning area of investigation in the wake of
advances in in-home technology to enhance the health
and independence of older adults without the constraints
and expenses of the traditional health care system.
Advances in health and communications technology come
at a time of dramatic worldwide increases in life expectancy and skyrocketing health care costs. Home monitoring and assistive technologies are employed to identify
changes in health and behavior in home settings, and to
facilitate successful adaptation to those changes. This
section concludes some paradigms of healthcare application in AAL (Table 1).
Kameas and Calemis [34] have surveyed a collection of
pervasive systems in supporting activities with health signiﬁcance. The @Home system can provide service to
remotely monitor patient's vital parameters like ECG, blood
pressure and oxygen saturation level. The HEARTFAID system is a knowledge-based platform that can improve early
diagnosis and medical-clinical management of heart diseases. The system provides services such as electronic
health record for easy and ubiquitous access to heterogeneous patient data; integrated services for health-care
professionals, including patient tele-monitoring, signal and
image processing; alert and alarm system; clinical decision
support in the heart failure domain, based on pattern
recognition in historical data; and knowledge discovery
analysis and inferences on patient clinical data. The
CHRONIC (An Information Capture and Processing Environment for Chronic Patients in the Information Society)
project aimed to develop an integrated model for the care
of targeted chronic patients in Europe.
The iCarer project [35] aims at supporting the informal
care of older adults to deliver inter-operable solutions
providing a holistic cloud-based care support service
(Fig. 6). This includes Tunstall's lifestyle monitoring services
(ADLife), enhanced to provide informal caregivers with the
information required to support them in their care duties.
Additional services include a personalized support and
training program based on e-Learning methods, assistance
mechanisms for the caregiver and monitoring and assistance
services for the person being cared for. These services
combine in order to achieve an overall feeling of safety
and a substantial stress reduction for the caregiver.
In [36], an integrated lifestyle management system is
proposed to record the user's daily health status parameters
and activities for health support. The system has three
layers, information gathering, information processing, and
information presentation, with the following components:

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey

235

 The Data Gathering Agent (DGA) collects data from

 The Policy Agent performs as a manager of policies

various input sources. The input source can be the
devices used by the user such as mobile phone, GPS,
IMU, Alive Heart Monitor [37], and PC activity Platform.
The Data Transformation Agent (DTA) operates on the
input data available in differing formats and in multiple
local storage locations: such as data conversion, data
clustering, ﬁltering, sorting into a user database, data
optimization and Database Model Management.
The Information Agent is responsible for processing the
data collected in the central database through the
information model.
The Presentation Agent contains the role of assembling
information into a story format, according to the
Story Model.
The User Interface Agent is used to create various
information visualizations.

related to information usage, as well as various user
preferences, and will become increasingly important
once external parties are added to the system.







Table 1

This system can not only provide monitoring of health status
with speciﬁc parameters, but also reﬂects the reason of
“what happened”.
The Home Healthcare Monitoring System (HHMS) supports
older users' daily health-care and their quality of life by
collecting relevant medical and daily routing data. The data
is gathered into a Healthcare Management Information
System (HMIS) for physicians in hospital to diagnose. A
interoperability Mediation System was proposed in [38]
which acts as a bridge between HHMS and HMIS. HHMS
collects information in raw sensoray format and stores in
XML format while HMIS follows standard structure of

AAL for health, rehabilitation and care [8].

AAL service

Level 1

Level 2

Self-management
of chronic diseases

Intervention of the patient for
powering and management of
diseases
Telemonitoring, remote consults
using audio and low resolution
video

Patient part of the care team,
integrated processes

Chronic disease
management

Medication
management
Rehabilitation

Care team support

Level 3

No patient intervention for
powering and management of
diseases
Integration of services at care
Cross institutional integration,
delivery organisations, link to non- supporting integrative care
healthcare services, ﬁtness and
models
activity management
Reminder system with monitoring Extended with educational and
Integrated into disease
of medication intake
motivation for the patient and
management
medicine interaction check
Monitor exercises in home situa- Support and monitor exercises
Support and monitor exercises
tion using wearable sensors
with operational devices at home with exoskeleton-like devices
using advanced neuro-scientiﬁc
control models
Stand-alone services like teleIntegration of services at care
Cross institutional integration,
monitoring, tele-consultation,
delivery organisation, link to non- supporting integrative care
medication management, activity healthcare services like ﬁtness and models and non healthcare
management
activity management
services

Fig. 6 Architecture of iCarer system and services [35].

236
information based on its compliance with the health-care
standard. In their system, a HARE (Human Activity Recognition Engine) is developed to monitor the activities of
Alzheimer disease patients. Clinical Document Architecture
(CDA) markup standard is used to specify the structure and
semantics of “clinic documents” from the sensors data
gathered, processed, and then ﬁltered as part of CDA
documents.
In [39] Corchado et al. developed the GerAmi (Geriatric
Ambient Intelligence), an intelligent environment that
integrates multiagent systems, mobile devices, RFID, and
Wi-Fi technologies to facilitate management and control of
geriatric residences. The system was evaluated to reduce
task time with Nurse agent and Doctor agent, provide
patient care by enhancing the communication between
patients and hospital staff, facilitate security monitoring
patients and guaranteeing that each is in the right place,
storing information more securely.
Quality of sleep is an important attribute of a senior
person's health state. The sleep pattern is a signiﬁcant aspect
to evaluate the quality of sleep. An automatic sleep monitoring system for home health-care is presented by [40]. In this
system, the sleep data can be collected by sensor board and
transmitted to data centre in real-time and continuous mode.
A web-based application is used to visualize sleep data. It
also provides algorithms to produce user's sleep qualities and
health patterns by analysing the sleep data.
Safety risks are the most often-cited reason for people
having to leave their homes for supported living environments. According to the caregivers, wheelchair users tend
to fall down from their beds or their wheelchairs when they
transfer between the bed and the wheelchair or between
wheelchair and toilet seat. It is also likely that older people
who suffer from senile dementia tumble from their beds
when they try to sneak out of the bed. Pivato et al.
proposed a low-cost wearable WSN node for body detection
[41]. Their project was resulted in an ultra-light and easily
wearable device for both fall detection and coarse-grained
RSS-based localisation, while keeping lifetime as long as
possible.
Diabetes Support Systems usually record blood glucose
measurements, time stamps as well as information related
to administering insulin. A diabetes support system in AAL is
described in [42]. The service value network (SVN) approach
is applied to automatically match medical practice recommendations based on patient sensor data in a home care
monitoring context to health services provided by a network
of service providers. The system is demonstrated with an
SVN composition based on an initial set 493 patient proﬁles
in the context of Type 2 Diabetes management.
Memory decline is a highly debilitating condition for many
seniors, especially for those with dementia. There have
been many applications within the area of AAL that are
relevant to older adults with cognitive impairments
[7,43,44,9]. Automated Memory Support for Social Interaction (AMSSI), a system proposed by Bellodi et al. [45], helps
memory impaired people with their social interaction. This
system provides active support that may help reducing
stress level of patients. It can recognize visitors, determine
the purpose of the visit, monitor the dialogue, determine
whether the patient needs support, and provide feedback.
AMSSI is tailored to patient needs, it has fast computation,

R. Li et al.
full automation, and can be handled by the patient without
supervision. The assistive system can be beneﬁcial for
improving the quality of life of patients with mild to
moderate cognitive impairments.
Paper-based Early Warning Scorecards (EWS) are widespread in hospital for clinical decision support. They are
designed to help clinicians identify the patients who are
most at risk of suffering an adverse event in advance. A
scorecard is a reference table which associates individual
vital signs parameters (e.g. heart rate, respiratory rate,
etc.) with a score (0, 1, 2, or 3), which is representative of
the physiological derangement from a normal range. But
sometimes hospitals and caregivers experience delayed
recognition of the deterioration and this leads to late
referral to critical care, even some cases death. An
Electronic-Early Warning Scorecard proposed in [46] has
demonstrated its signiﬁcant efﬁciency and usability over
paper-based EWS with a sensor based network health
monitoring with context awareness.

2.3.

Mobility assistance

Mobility is signiﬁcant component to quality of life as it
allows a person to independently move about when and
where he or she intends to go. Many people with motor
disabilities and cognitive impairments often encounter
various barriers in their daily life. They invalidate the
ability to perform movement to a desired destination and
certain tasks. This limits the capacity of operating devices,
manipulating objects and mobility. As a result, a considerable part of the population with motor impairment must
rely on assistance from others to get from place to place.
Mobility support ranges from assistance with planning routes
and navigation from one location to another safely without
human intervention.
The research of smart wheelchairs emerged since the early
1980s over the world to accommodate these people [47].
Assistive robotics technologies have been applied to develop
smart wheelchairs that can provide navigation assistance.
Such wheelchair typically consist of electric powered wheelchair or scooter with computer attached sensors and actuators. Since the 1990s, several long-term projects were
established to develop appropriate wheelchairs for motor
disabled people. VAHM [48] is a EU project from 1989 to 2002,
an agent based smart wheelchair was developed in the
project. The NavChair [49] is an advanced intelligent wheelchair developed in a project from 1990 to 1999. The
collaborative shared control architecture prototype was
proposed in NavChair and this signiﬁcant architecture was
employed widely in many intelligent wheelchairs [47].
SENARIO [50] wheelchair is developed in a EU founded
project. It can provide shared-control navigation (obstacle
avoidance) and autonomous navigation based on a pre-built
map. Neural networks are used for localization, and distributed control architecture in SENARIO. The Wheelesley [51]
project (1995–2002) at MIT employed machine vision for
obstacle detection, which allows wheelchair to travel safely
outdoors as well. PerMMA [52] is composed of a robotic
powered wheelchair and two arms to provide enhanced
mobility and bi-manual manipulation for people with lower
and upper extremity impairment (Fig. 7).

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey

237

Fig. 7 Examples of intelligent wheelchair prototypes. (a) NavChair, (b) Wheelesley, (c) VAHM and (d) PerMMA-wheelchair.

However, hitherto there are few intelligent wheelchairs
that are widely sold commercially, most of them are still in
laboratory for research use since it is too expensive and
seldom affordable to citizen. Many ongoing research projects [53–57] aim to reduce the cost of intelligent wheelchairs and enhance the capabilities of the wheelchairs with
higher “Intelligence”.
Besides wheelchairs, some other innovative personal
mobility devices such as Nosegay vehicles [58], Mecanum
wheel vehicles [59], Hybrid Assistive Limb (HAL) [60],
intelligent mobility scooter [61], smart tricycle [62] and
smart vehicle are investigated by the research communities.
These robotic products will be signiﬁcant to accommodate
the population with mobility barriers (Fig. 8).

2.4.

Social inclusion and communication

Another important mission of AAL service is to prevent
social isolation. Social interaction and communication are
factors that have remarkable inﬂuence on the quality of
life. As an individual, interacting with others and taking

apart in social activities and entertainment are essential
elements of enjoyable life. Traditionally, people can get to
communicate with their families and friends via phone,
email, internet based communications etc. Television,
newspaper and the internet are typically the main media
to access social information and entertainment. However,
many older people with cognitive/physical impairments
have obstacle to access the social media and participate
insocial activities. Whence AAL technology aims to engage
the elderly to stay happy in their living environment, remain
active in their community, and have contact with their
community [63].
GENIO [64] is an AAL application in home automation. It is
endowed with functions such as reading e-mails, programming washing machine, checking the goods in the refrigerator, creating a shopping list, doing shopping with a PDA in
a supermarket, activating the dishwasher, being guided on
how to prepare a recipe for the oven and checking if there
are the needed goods to do so, listening some music stored
at home, watching some photos, watching some selected
video and so on. The users can dialogue with the system
through a microphone attached in their pocket.

238

R. Li et al.

Fig. 8 Mobility assistance equipment prototypes. (a) Segway wheelchair, (b) Omni(mecanum) wheelchair, (c) HAL, (d) Smart
scooter, (e) Mobility aids walker and (f) Toyota-i-real.

The aim of Building Bridge Project [66] is to applied
communication technology to enhance social connection for
the older with their peers, family and friends. The device
can provide older people with the opportunity to connect
with their family and friends through the shared experience
of a video or radio broadcast (such as documentaries, news,
and health bulletins). Following each broadcast, listeners
have the option to take part in a group chat. Further
functionality includes individual or group calls, a (textual)
messaging service, and most recently a tea room which
represents a chat forum (Fig. 9).
A domestic communication designed within NETCARITY
(EU FP6) project aimed to provide services that foster social
contact and strengthen social ties within the social network
of elderly people living alone [67]. The project proposed a
prototype of e-inclusion: a user interface that exploits
touch-screen technology, whereby interaction is based on
the direct manipulation of the digital objects, using natural
gestures recalling real world motor patterns.
The HOST project [65], a smart technology for selfservice to seniors in social housing, is a part of the EU AAL
Joint Programme. It aims to provide solutions to the needs
of Social Housing requirements today, in order to enrich the
life of the elderly living in the current social house park with

a comfortable and friendly context to enable the integration of older population into a self-serve society. These
competences of social hosing allow a better quality of
communication and a better access to package services
from the elderly; enable easier relations with, family,
service providers and housing operators, through enriched
supports (images, text, voice, documents) (Fig. 10).

3.
3.1.

Instrumentation and platforms
Appliances and sensors for AAL

A smart home is a daily living space with various types of
sensors and actuators installed, in order to monitor activities and control appliances in the space. Sensors and
actuators are the main components that cannot be absent
in a smart home. The sensors are used to measure the
temperature, light intensity in the environment or sample
the biological signals from the users. This actively obtained
information is used as the inputs of a smart home system, so
a user does not need to manually input them. The actuators
are used to perform user's repeatedly or predictively

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey

Fig. 9

Social Inclusion Services for assisted living [35].

actions, like turning on/off appliances opening/shutting a
door, etc., which adds autonomous features to the system.
In a typical smart home, the devices/ appliances are
summarised below [68]:

 Sensors: RFID tag, physical presence sensor, positioning





sensor, health monitoring detector (body sensor), accident detector, video camera (CCTV or private camera);
Household appliances: Refrigerator, washing machine,
lights, bed, door, TV, computer, cleaner, air conditioner,
kitchen appliances etc.;
Actuators: Door open/closing actuator, window open/
closing actuator, air-conditioning actuator, light actuator,
home appliances switches;
Security: Password lock,voice pattern lock, Biometric
veriﬁer (ﬁngerprint reader, iris scanner);
Communicate: Network, smart-phone (watch, camera),
human machine interfaces.

There are various wearable health monitoring devices currently on the market such as 9Solutions IPCS, Health Buddy
(Bosch), Telestation (Phillips), Genesis DM (Honeywell),
Health Guide (Intel), LifeView (American TeleCare), Ideal
LIFE Pod (Ideal Life), Healthanywhere (Healthanywhere Inc.),
Respiratory Rate Detector [69] and Smart cloth [70–72].
These systems are able to take physiological readings (e.g.
blood pressure, heart rate, temperature, glucose levels,
calories etc.) using conventional measurement devices (e.g.
blood pressure cuff, thermometer, blood glucose meter,
location etc.) and share them remotely with clinicians [73].
In many smart home prototypes, the typical appliances
(bed, lights, bathroom, TV, fridge, cook stove, etc.) are
designed particularly for the older or disabled for convenient and safe access. For some cognitive impaired people,
it may lead to ﬁre risk if they forget to switch off the stove
and leave a pan on it. A stove guard kitchen monitor is
presented in [74]. The monitor is mounted on stove to avoid
the risk of ﬁre. Another smart kitchen system for AAL is
described in [75], which integrates a wide variety of home
technologies (household appliances, sensors, user

239
interfaces, etc.) and associated communication standards
and media (power line, radio frequency, infrared and
cables). The system is based on the Open Services Gateway
initiative (OSGi), which allows building a complex system
composed of small modules, each one providing the speciﬁc
functionalities required, and is easily scaled to meet
our needs.
The Robotic Bed [76] is sleeping system equipped with a
wheelchair-like control system. It enables the user to steer
easily and to change between the wheelchair and the bed.
In the wheel chair mode the robot is able to recognize
people and obstacles in order to avoid collisions and to
navigate safely. In the bed mode, it supports the posture by
adjusting and optimisation the mattress form. Intelligence
Toilet [76] in Daiwa House & Cyberdyne is a toilet system,
which is able to measure the sugar level in the urine, and
also the blood pressure, body fat and weight. These
features should facilitate the user to avoid forthcoming
illnesses by early diagnosis and reduce medical inspections
at a doctor's ofﬁce.
Many of these devices allow the person being monitored
to interact with clinicians over video screens, enabling more
personal communication. Some also have access to online,
multimedia educational materials, caregiver networks, and
other resources that can help people to manage conditions.
These tools can be valuable for caregivers and clinicians
who are managing the health of older adults with dementia
living at home. With the help of these sensors and actuators, a smart home is then able to analyze the requirements
of people that having cognitive impairment, and support
them living better on their own.
With further processes, additional information could be
acquired beyond the sensor was originally designed for. For
example, WLAN (wireless local area network) is a common
basic communication framework in a modern building.
Besides its normal communication usage, a location tracking
application is possible to be implemented by calculating the
distances of mobile devices to each network access point. In
this design, the advantages are no additional localisation
devices are needed and it can work indoors. The difﬁculties
usually are caused by the complexity of environment (walls,
passengers and other obstacles). In order to solve this
problem, [77] uses a back-propagation neural network to
calibrate the interference from the obstacles. By combining
various type of sensors, even more information could be
obtained. Explicitly, cameras, temperature, light and other
sensors are used to learn a user's interferences behavior in a
smart environment in [27].
Based on the current development trend, we noticed that
the basic sensor types are limited, smart home (environment) appliances are required to have various sensors
collaborate together to provide the most information, and
have standard information sharing interfaces to interact
with other smart appliances.

3.2.

Robotic service platforms

The next revolution in the smart home is expected to come
from the world of robotics [78]. Service and assistive robotic
technologies have high relevance to AAL. Robotic assistive
technologies cover a range of applications helping people

240

R. Li et al.

Fig. 10

Scenario of Social Inclusion Services for HOST assisted living [65].

with physical, social, and/or cognitive disorders from daily
tasks to cognitive rehabilitation. For different purposes,
the robotic service platforms vary from each other in
mobility, size and appearance design. Ref [8] lists a rich
collection of platforms for personal daily care. The most
major of those recognised today include mobility, selfmaintenance activities assistance, such as cooking, feeding,
dressing, grooming, bathing etc. Ref [79] presents a serial of
approaches to enhance the cognitive capabilities of ubiquitous robots, in order to supply users with assistive services
and execute complex tasks in dynamic real world domains.
Mobility assistance is an essential service for disabled
persons. Intelligent wheelchairs, guide-canes, assistive
limbs and interactive walkers are developed to support
mobility to the older and disabled as we mentioned in
previous section.
Many elderly people have difﬁcult activities of the daily
living such as feeding, dressing, meals preparation, taking
medicines and so on. Service robots provide the user with a

functional assistance to deal with the difﬁculties encountered in daily life. As an example, Pearl robot [80] from the
Carnegie Mellon University is one of the most-cited and
studied robots which provides routine activity reminders
(eating, drinking, taking medicine) as well as some walking
guidance. The interaction is realized through speech synthesis, visual display onto a touch screen, and motions of an
actuated head unit. Other relevant systems are the Care-oBot [78], the Cero [81] robot, PR2 robot and the ROBOCARE
[28] (Fig. 11).
Besides, as the health of a person is closely related to the
quality of life. With the age growing, elderly people are
more likely to rely on nutrition supplements or drugs for
senile diseases. Medicine service robots should be capable
to remind the user and monitor the drug intake information.
Some robots are designed to maintain proper diet, exercises, health monitoring and check up or monitor health
parameters. MINAmI was a project working on interacting
tiny AmI environmental sensors with a mobile phone. One of

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey

Fig. 11 Some domestic assistant robots for commercial and
research.

241
educational or entertainment services with immersion and
realistic experiences. The later category is the major object
of the human–robot psychology research. In this research,
the interaction between human and robots is organized in a
Complex Interactive System (CIS) and multiple dimensions
of communication effects are discussed and analyzed.
Particularly, a robot cat (NeCoRo, Omron Corp. [88]) is used
as the research object while Person–Robot Complex Interaction Scale (PRCIS) [89] is used as an assessment tool.
The research in domestic service robotics concerns Selforganizing brains, Human–Robot-Interaction and Cooperation, Navigation and Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
(SLAM) in dynamic environments, Computer Vision and
Object Recognition under natural light conditions, and
Object Manipulation. All these challenges involve vast area
of research subjects and disciplines.

3.3.
their targets is to provide supplement safety and health
services for older people. As a part of this research, a
similar drug service platform is described in [82].
A robot exercise coach presented in [83] is able to train
physical exercise for the older population. Its built in workout
game, sequence game, imitation game, and memory game
help the users with cognitive impairment and engage them in
participate in social activities.
A robot might be employed for security and emergency
intervention. Such a robot is able to monitor home and
upload sensor data to the server and identify risks. In the
case of an emergency situation such as detected fall, a
mobile robot has the advantage that it is able to move
towards a person. The robot can talk to the person ﬁrst, and
then take a picture, send it to caregivers and initiate an
alarm. Furthermore, the fallen person could call the robot
for help. The robot can directly contact the user and initiate
a call to family members or caregivers [84].
To help and ease the living of the cognitive impairment
older people, companion robots are being investigated by
various institutions. A robotic baby seal (Paro) is being
developed at AIST (The National Institute of Advanced
Industrial Science and Technology, Japan). From their
experimental results in [85], it is proved that Paro actually
brings happiness to the elderly people with different levels
of cognitive impairment (evaluated by counting the smiling/
laughing times during the experiments). More theoretically,
the interaction mechanism between companions (animal or
robotic companion) and humans is being investigated at the
MIT Media Lab. To test the corresponding theory framework,
a robotic Teddy-bear is constructed. Based on how the
animal or human skin is designed, [86] investigated the
usages of various types of sensor (including temperature ,
pressure, etc.) to construct the “sensitive skin ”.
Instead of discussing the technical details, [87] studies
the potential psychology theory between human and robots.
It points out that the recent robots can be classiﬁed into
two major categories according to their applications: assisting robots and interactive simulation robots. Assisting robots
aim at increasing the working productivity or ﬁnishing the
jobs that are impossible for humans. In contrast, the
interactive simulation robots focuses on providing social,

Human machine interfaces

Various smart device technologies are steadily penetrating
our daily lives. We are surrounded by these products and
interact with them in many ways. Particularly, such devices
may potentially improve the quality of life of older people
and patients with impairments. Applications of daily living
assistance require robust interfaces that allow for natural
control. These interfaces may rely on diverse modal information that can be related with the intention, preparation
and generation of voluntary movement, either at mechanical or neural level. To have the smart environment work
more pervasive and easier to access by elderly people who
usually do not have much knowledge on operating complex
computer systems, the human machine interfaces (HMIs)
largely determines whether the smart homes are acceptable
by elderly users (Fig. 12).
Instead of using traditional keyboards and mice, natural
interaction approaches between human and machines
(robots) are investigated in both academia and industry.
Some relatively mature techniques include using joystick
and touch pad/screen. Compared with the keyboard/mouse
commands, these methods provides a more intuitive interacting experiences.
In order to provide immersive using experience, voice and
vision controllers are widely employed. Since the experience using these is more close to the interaction between
humans, it is more natural and effective. In the voice
control research, voice recognition is well researched and
the difﬁculties remains in the natural language processing
(NLP). The target of NLP is ﬁnding the approaches to have
machines understand human languages. Vision interaction is
a relatively wider research ﬁeld, it contains various topics
and each of them has the great potential in different
scenarios. For instance, an eye-blink monitoring system is
proposed in [90], a vision 3D automatic microassembly
system is presented in [91], and a thermal-based human
tracking system that can localise users is reported in [92].
Except for the traditional camera based methods, more
powerful cameras with depth information are being developed and used for research in recent years, such as Kinect
[93] and Leap Motion [94,95]. Due to the depth information
obtained, more control strategies are able to be developed

242

R. Li et al.

Fig. 12 Examples of human machine interface. (a) GUI, (b) voice control, (c) EPOC Emotiv (EEG), (d) computer vision based
control, (e) Myo gesture control (EMG +IMU) and (f) leap motion gesture control.

with better accuracy. Specially, biological signals are one of
the solutions for pervasively receiving commands from
human. Widely investigated biological electro signals
include EMG (Electromyography), EEG (Electroencephalography) and EOG (Electrooculography) [96].

4. Monitoring and communication
infrastructure
Typically, AAL environments are composed by different
kinds of devices such as mobile phones, embedded devices,
and wired or wireless sensors. Although nowadays there are
raising some efforts raised based on communication standards for tele-medical devices, its adoption is going slow. In
addition, both biomedical and user devices often run on
different network protocols which obstruct a real integration between the devices. Smart sensors have been a
breakthrough in the applications of monitoring mobile
objects or individuals. On this basis, smart sensors are
becoming a main “role ” on AAL environments. Thanks to
the protocols and standards of sensor network technology,
the heterogeneous devices are able to communicate and
process the information between a smart home and users.

4.1.

Some standards of communication for AAL

WSNs are an important technological support for smart
environments and ambient assisted applications. A WSN
consists of hundreds or thousands of sensor nodes that have
the ability to communicate either with each other or
directly with the base-station. A base-station is a ﬁxed
node or a mobile node that is capable of connecting the
sensor network to an existing communications infrastructure or to the Internet. At a higher level, WSNs can be
modeled as a distributed database where every node is a
database. The attributes of database are the types of
sensors mounted on the node. A user can query the
database (node) to retrieve the values of attributes of
interest, such as pressure, humidity, temperature, longitude, latitude, etc.. Due to the embedded, distributed,
pervasive and other features that commonly required in AAL
projects, a series of suitable communication standards are
usually chosen as the guide for developing smart environments. Some of the important ones are organised below
[97]:
CORBA: Common Object Requester Broker Architecture
(CORBA) is a standard for enabling software modules,
written in multiple languages and run on different computers, to work together. Additionally, CORBA provides a

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey
strong data-type between different languages to reduce
human errors, encapsulates data-transfer and other low
level technical details to enhance the robustness, and
makes the system development more convenient. Therefore, this standard could be considered as the foundation of
developing distributed systems.
UPnP: UPnP (Universal Plug and Play) is a group of
protocols or a much-extended architecture suggested by
Microsoft (Olleros 2007) and promulgated by the UPnP
Forum, which ensures that some network devices can
autoconﬁgure. The aims of UPnP are making sure that the
devices can connect perfectly and simplifying the implementation of networks at home (exchange of data, communications
and
entertainment)
and in corporate
environments. It is an open and distributed architecture
based on already existing protocols and speciﬁcations, such
as UDP, SSDP, SOAP or XML. In order to simplify the
installation and connection between any two devices in a
distributed network, the UPnP is promoted as a set of
networking protocols. This protocol set allows the peer-topeer connection between devices, which is a distributed
architecture based on various established protocols such as
TCP/IP, UDP/IP, and HTTP, etc. As a instance, ALL applications in [98,99] employed UPnP to integrate robot and
sensors to the digital home.
Jini: Jini is an architecture similar to UPnP. By using
which, a device can announce its presence to the network
together with its services as soon as its connected to a
network. Compared with UPnP, both of them are designed
for the “plug and play” feature, but UPnP focuses more on
managing devices in the network while Jini concentrates on
discovering and providing services [100].
WS (Web Service): WS is usually used as a supplementary
technique to the previously mentioned standards. The main
highlight of this standard is that the standard text-based
HTTP is used and it can compatibly run on different
platforms. However, due to the overly complex package
header (this requires fragmentation frequently), the textbased function calling approach cost higher run-time
resources. Additionally, WS can easily penetrate the ﬁrewall, which provides convenience on communication but
also introduces security problems. To solve these problems,
[101] proposes the embedded web services.

4.2. Communication techniques in current AAL
projects
Internet of things (IoT) provides connectivity and intelligence to convert small devices and common things into
smart objects. The IoT describes a world where machines
and physical objects are seamlessly integrated into the
information network, and communicate together to
exchange and process information.
The smart objects present high capabilities to integrate
and transfer enriched data from embedded sensors, activities, behaviours and clinical devices from mobile health
and smart environments. AAL with IoT technology can
facilitate disabled people with the assistance and support
they need to achieve a good quality of life and allows them
to participate in the social and economic life. Assistive IoT
technologies are powerful tools to increase independence

243
and improve participation. Smart environment projects
presented in [102–105] provide some instances of IoT
for AAL.
For example, in [102], communications among devices
are categorised into two groups: LTE-based indoor communication and short-distance wireless communication. The
LTE is also known as the 4G mobile network which provides
better data capacity. While using the 20 MHz channel, its
downlink and uplink can reach to 100 Mbps and 50 Mbps.
This makes the data bandwidth sufﬁcient for connecting
mass number of devices simultaneously. The short distance
wireless communication techniques include Bluetooth,
RFID, WiFi, and Zigbee. From the analysis in the paper, it
has been found that Bluetooth suffers from the communication distance being too short and the peer-to-peer communication mode, and RFID encounters poor reliability.
Therefore, the usage of these two techniques are relatively
limited in a smart environment. In contrast, WiFi is developing fast in the sense of its coverage area and data
transmitting speed capability. Zigbee is a new type of
technique with low power consuming and high reliability.
Hence they are predicted to play signiﬁcant roles in the
future smart environments.
Compared with the traditional network communication
techniques, the ones used in AAL require additional conﬁgurations with a larger address space and lower power
consumption. In order to achieve this goal, [106] provides
a gateway solution that can interact with IPv6 devices over
6LoWPAN (IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area
Networks). To be compatible with IPv4, WiFi and Ethernet
interfaces are also provided. Additionally, UPnP is enabled
on IPv6 to make the system easier to be conﬁgured
and used.
Ref [107] provide an example of intrusion detection
system, using WiFi/internet with mobile SMS (short message
service). In this project, the camera information is collected
from each of the cameras in different rooms through WiFi
and passed to the cloud service over internet. If any
intrusion occurs, the cloud will send a message to the user
together with the corresponding camera streaming video.
Then the user is able to make the decision, e.g. call the
local police or ring the alarm.
As a conclusion, most of the existing communication
techniques can ﬁnd their own positions in AAL projects,
depending on several criteria: installation/maintaining
costs, power consumption, security level, communicating
speed, etc. A balance among all these factors is the key of
producing a better smart environment.

5.
5.1.

Theories and approaches for AAL system
Multi-agent system

Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems represent a
way of analysing, designing, and implementing complex
software systems. The agent-based approach offers a collection of powerful tools, techniques, and metaphors that
have the potential to signiﬁcantly improve the way in which
people conceptualise and implement different types of
complex software. Agents and multi-agent systems are
being applied in an increasingly wide variety of applications

244

R. Li et al.

[108]. Of course, the multi-agent systems approach is
widely used in support of Ambient Assisted Living in various
aspects. Using a multi-agent system for the AAL environment consists of agents that represent inhabitants (humans,
animals, plants, and objects) of the environment and
physical devices (sensors and actuators) that control and
monitor the environment. The issues involving multiple
parameter optimisation and constraint satisfaction while
maintaining the well-being and physical structure of the
inhabitants of environment as well as the comfort of multiple human inhabitants sharing the same environment and its
resources Inhabitants. An ambient agent is assumed to
maintain knowledge about certain aspects of human functions, and information about the current state and history of
the world and other agents. Such paradigms of agent-based
AAL systems can be found from [109–113]. Here we brieﬂy
describe some instances of AAL systems which utilise agentbased approaches (Fig. 13).
The MavHome smart home project [25] focuses on the
creation of an environment that acts as an intelligent agent,
perceiving the state of the home through sensors and acting
upon the environment through device controllers. The
MavHome agent can be decomposed into multiple lowerlevel agents responsible for sub-tasks within the home,
including robot and sensor agents, and MavHome can
dynamically reorganise the hierarchy to maximise performance. Within the system, agents are separated into four
cooperating layers. (1) The Decision layer selects actions for
the agent to execute based on information supplied from
the other layers through the Information layer. (2) The
Information layer gathers, stores, and generates knowledge
useful for decision making. (3) The Communication layer
facilitates the communication of information, requests, and

Fig. 13

queries between agents. (4) The Physical layer contains the
hardware within the house including individual devices,
transducers, and network hardware.
In [115] an agent-based ambient is presented based on
monitoring human's interaction with his or her environment
and performing cognitive analysis of the causes of observed
or predicted behaviours. Within the agent architecture, a
cognitive model for the human is taken as a point of
departure. From the cognitive model it is automatically
derived how internal cognitive states affect human's performance aspects. Furthermore, for these cognitive states
representation relations are derived from the cognitive
model, expressed by temporal speciﬁcations involving
events that will be monitored. The representation relations
are veriﬁed on the monitoring information automatically,
resulting in the identiﬁcation of cognitive states, which
affect the performance aspects. In such a way the ambient
agent model is able to provide a more in-depth cognitive
analysis of causes of (un)satisfactory performance and
based on this analysis generate interventions in a knowledgeable manner. The multi-agents architecture and ontology deﬁned permits real time environment processing and
user data collected through non-invasive market sensors,
installed in the home, to allow early detection and notiﬁcation of potentially dangerous situation like the elderly
falling.
As computers become ubiquitous, settings in which they
make decisions with people over time are becoming increasingly prevalent. Many of these settings require computer
agents to generate advice to their human users about which
decisions to take in a way that guides their behaviour. Such
settings arise in a variety of application domains such as
hospital care-delivery systems, negotiation training or route-

An example of multiagent system for AAL [114].

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey
navigation systems. Although computers and people in these
domains share some goals, such as completing the user's
tasks, their goals may also conﬂict. An intelligent agents
reasoning platform to support smart home tele-care presented in [116] offers advice provision strategies for computer agents that interact with people in repeated settings. The
models of these interactions are deﬁned as a family of
repeated games of incomplete information called choice
selection processes comprising a human and a computer
player. Both of the participants in a choice selection process
are self-interested.

5.2.

Context modelling and context awareness

Context awareness (i.e. heart rate monitoring, medication
prompting, generation of agenda reminders, temperature
changing, weather alerts, emergency notiﬁcations, and
human emotions) is a signiﬁcant feature in smart environments designed for helping elderly people living alone and
independently in their homes. Activity monitoring and
recognition may be useful in generating health or emergency alerts in both short and long term, possibly requiring
immediate intervention, performing ﬂuid interaction, and
providing associated actions or services with regard to the
dwellers behaviours, etc. This is very meaningful for helping
people with cognitive and mobility impairments to promote
Active Ageing activities related to communication, stimulation and environmental control [116]. In order to achieve
this, a system must have a thorough knowledge of environments. We may say “understanding” of the environments,
devices and people existing in it; “knowing” the interests of
user, the capabilities system, the events happening, the
tasks and activities are being undertaken, etc. [117].
The issues context awareness include [118]:

 how to acquire, categorise and model contextual
information;

 how to exploit contexts to answer a user's data request;
 how to effectively communicate answers to the users on
small hand-held devices;

 context-aware query language for users;
 what context-aware strategies are needed, both for

ﬁnding useful answers to queries and for presenting the
answers to the users.

To understand the behaviour of humans in the AAL
environment, activity monitoring and recognition problems
have to be considered, which uses data collected from
environmental sensors installed in the home and wearable
biomedical sensors to build a proﬁle of the dweller's typical
pattern of living and health status, such as when a person
gets up and goes to bed, level and location of movement. Any
variation from the typical pattern of activity may be a source
of concern, for example a reduced level of activity during the
day may be indicative of a decline in health status. Activity
recognition algorithms can be divided into three categories:
machine learning techniques [119,120], grammar based
techniques [121] and ontological reasoning [122]. Many types
of machine algorithms for activity recognition were developed, including Hidden Markov Models, Bayesian Networks or
Support Vector Machine techniques [123,124]. Among them

245
Hidden Markov Models and Bayesian Networks are the most
commonly used methods in activity recognition. Standard
Hidden Markov Models (HMM) are employed for simple
activity recognition [125–127]. Moreover, Hybrid model of
Bayesian networks and support vector machines is used for
more accurate and faster activity recognition [128].
Expression of real world states, is related with information expression and knowledge expression. Bikakis [129] and
Hiristova [130] presented various solutions that have been
proposed to represent context for the AAL environment by
invoking semantics-based approaches. By semantic
approach, we mean ontology language and model which is
widely used for the representation of context. An ontology
is understood as a formal, explicit speciﬁcation of a
common conceptualisation. The use of ontology languages
is becoming common in AAL applications mainly because
they offer enough representational capabilities to develop a
formal context model that can be shared, reused, extended
for the needs of speciﬁc domains, but also combined with
data originating from other sources. Moreover, most of them
have relatively low computational complexity, allowing
them to deal well with situations of rapidly changing
context. These technologies simplify the reaction to various
and rapidly changing needs of assisted living [131]. In
accordance to the general understanding of information
sciences, ontologies are composed of a vocabulary and the
coherent explicit assumptions regarding the meaning of the
vocabulary. For the description of the vocabulary, logicbased languages can be used with their most prominent
representative, the Web Ontology Language (OWL).
In an ontology based information system, semantic-web
based languages, like RDF (Resource Description Framework) and OWL (Web Ontology Language), are commonly
employed to describe taxonomies and logic for context
data. RDF is used to represent resources in the form of
Subject Predicate Object triples; RDF Schema (RDFS) created together with its formal semantic within RDF is used to
describe classes, properties and their relationships and we
use them both to create a lightweight ontology. OWL is a
language derived from description logic, and offers more
constructs over RDFS. OWL is used to create a more
expressive ontology [132,133].
Ontologies are used to derive data structures, schemas
and interfaces which provide access to the data saved in the
format of a given schema. During the development of such
an ontology the following characteristics have to be taken
into account according to [134]:

 The ontology has to be designed in a formal way so that it
can be processed by machines.

 The ontology has to be reasonable for the task at hand. It


should describe the problem domain reasonably well
without containing too much information.
The ontology represents the common understanding to all
of its users have about a problem domain.

Accordingly, ontology representation of context can be
applied in various scenarios of AAL applications. Ref [135]
presents Ontology-based state representations of long-term
activities of human for intention recognition in smart
environments. Blodow et al. [136], Galindo [137] and Lorenz
[138] proposed approach that uses ontology based semantic

246

R. Li et al.

mapping for robots performing everyday manipulation tasks
in kitchen environments. The projects in [139–141] use
ontology to produce semantic modelling of space which
can enhance human–robot interaction and navigation. Ambient home care systems (AHCS) in [130] are specially
designed for healthcare which can collect heath status from
ambient sensors and process the information with ontology.
An ontology and rule based intelligent information system to
detect and predict myocardial diseases is proposed by [142].
In [143], a formal representation of RAALI integration
proﬁles is described by ontology based framework—
AALOnto. Others instances of ontology-based contextawareness for AAL can be seen in [144–146].

5.3.

Reasoning and planning

Reasoning and planning are intersective and conjunctive
issues in the study of AAL system. The role of reasoning in
context aware systems is to deduce and derive from the
basic context information (includes information unknown,
ambiguous, imprecise, and erroneous) to generate meaningful information and support system decision making.
Planning concerns the problem of how to achieve a goal
state starting from a known initial state. To achieve a goal,
the system needs to deduce the existing knowledge based
on the available context data. An entire process of planing
produces a sequence or partially ordered collection of
actions that if executed starting from the initial state,
which is expected to achieve the goal state. There are
several ways that planning can be used in AAL scenarios, for
example in an AAL system, planning can be used to
coordinate the capabilities of the available resources to
provide a solution or perform a task; planning for AAL may
have to deal with multiple agency; planners can be used, for
example, to schedule task for speciﬁc status. Research in
the area of AI planning has made notable progress over the
last decade. There are many state-of-art reasoning and
planning algorithms have impacted different application
areas for AAL according to the surveys by [147–149].
The temporary-logic based approach concerns contextual
information over time [150]. A temporal plan is a sequence
of actions over the events that are maintained by temporal
constraints. In such a plan logical preconditions describe
under which circumstances an event may occur, its effects
(or postconditions) describe the changes to the current
world state after its occurrence [151,152]. In [153], the
authors present a remarkable paradigm of AAL system
planning with a temporal plan. They employ concepts drawn
from constraint-based planning and execution frameworks
in conjunction with efﬁcient temporal reasoning techniques
for human support. The planning framework uses a uniform
formalism based on Allen's interval algebra to represent
both the criteria for context recognition and a planning
domain for AAL services. Ullberg [154] proposed a prototype
of AAL system which utilises temporal constraints for
continuous activity monitoring.
Case-based reasoning is capable of handling imperfect
data and uncertain data as input for context aware. It is
made and each new case that is evaluated referring to
previously acquired cases. In general, case-based reasoning
is suitable for carrying out online analysis, as efﬁcient

algorithms are already available for this task [155]. This
method has been employed as a method for identifying
situations in a dynamic environment. In [156], Case-based
Reasoning and Case-based Planning are integrated as reasoning mechanisms into deliberative agents within a dynamic
AAL environment. The AAL applications in [157,158] also
demonstrate the use of Case-based reasoning.
Rule-based Reasoning is a typical reasoning approach
which provides a formal model for context reasoning. It
gives no inherent support for reasoning of incomplete data
or the handling of uncertain information (probabilistic
information). Besides, rule-based reasoning is easy to
understand and has widespread use, and there are many
systems that integrate them with the other model. Rulebased reasoning is well suited to online analysis and is also
scalable to handle large amounts of data. However, it
cannot handle highly changeable, ambiguous and imperfect
context information. In AAL application, rules are mainly
used to represent policies, constraints and preferences.
[159]. Bikakis et al. [129] presented FOL rules to reason
about context and to resolve possible conﬂicts, they have
deﬁned sets of rules on the classiﬁcation and quality
information of the context data. They suggest that different
types of context have different levels of conﬁdence and
reliability. For example, deﬁned context is more reliable
compared to sensed and deduced context.
To reason and process the ontology based representation
of contextual environment, semantic reasoning associated
methods are required. Description-logic (DL)-based reasoning
and Meta-logical (ML)-based reasoning are suitable for reasoning of OWL ontology [160–162]. Several semantic reasoning engines are developed to support the reason of ontology
and among are the Jena framework, Pellet, and RacerPro
[163–165] are primarily employed in the AAL community.
As many smart environment systems are agent-based, the
reasoning and planning methods relevant to agent and
multi-agent systems are considered to support AAL applications. BDI (Belief, Desire, Intention) is a essential reasoning
model for multi-agent system. It is based on a philosophical
model of human practical reasoning [166]. Beliefs are the
information an agent has about its environment. Desires are
goals assigned to the agent. Intentions are commitments by
an agent to achieve particular goals. In other words, they
are plans that are choices available to the agent at any
moment of time to achieve its goals [167,168].
Plans are central to BDI model of agency. For instance,
[156] presents a deliberative architecture model where the
agents' internal structure and capabilities are based on
mental aptitudes, using beliefs, desires and intentions. In
the system, Case-Based Reasoning systems are integrated
within deliberative BDI agents, facilitate learning and adaptation, and provide a greater degree of autonomy than pure
BDI architecture. In [169], a Context-Aware Multi-Agent
Planning (CAMAP) framework is proposed for intelligent
environments. CAMAP is applied to a real-world application
of AAL in the ﬁeld of health-care with BDI method. Game
theory has strong relation to multi-agent systems. In game
theory agents act to maximise what is called their utility. The
term utility is used in a very broad sense and refers to the
amount of welfare an agent derives from an object or an
event. Game theory can provide an explanatory account of
strategic reasoning in AAL systems [8].

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey
Besides, other approaches such as Fuzzy-logic Based
Reasoning, Evidential Reasoning, Dempster–Shafer theory,
Finite State Machine, Decision trees are commonly utilised
in different levels of AAL application. Since AAL systems are
heterogeneous and distributed, these approaches are integrated and hierarchised in different components and scenarios [17].

6.

Conclusion and perspectives

In this work, we have explored many aspects of the research
on AAL for older adults. The literatures and studies show the
motivation and solutions of ALL for the well-being of older
adults and deals with the problems of an aging society. The
cognitive aspects of AAL are essential to achieve a better
facilitation for users. AAL technology covers a broad range
of research topics from ambient intelligence, assistive
robotics, sensor networks, wearable sensors, internet of
things, big data, etc. The emerging and tremendous progress of these technologies have made it possible to improve
the older adults' daily life with AAL using wearable devices,
health monitors, and smart walkers. However, there are still
growing challenges that need to be addressed in the future.
Though the dramatic growth of IoT, wearable devices,
cloud computing, advanced robotics, sensor networks, etc.,
have made various kinds of products available for assistive
living. There is seldom of integration of these services to
unleash the full power of AAL for healthcare, rehabilitation
and assistive living. Integration of separate devices and
services in larger systems beneﬁts from collecting and
processing large volumes of data, evaluating more
complex situations and scenarios, collaborative tasking,
precise identiﬁcation of potentially dangerous situations
and ﬁnding solutions. The integration of AAL services relates
to interoperability, dynamic conﬁguration, communication,
context awareness (cognitive architectures), security and
privacy. A mixture of these would probably be required to
achieve the following outcome:

 The new generation of sensors should provide robust,






high-precision perception of context and components
related to assistive living. Besides, mobile and wearable
devices need to be comfortable to wear and less
obtrusive.
Assistive devices and robots can be designed to enhance
not only physical but also cognitive skills of human users
through mobility experiences. They should be able to
adapt to their gradual physical and cognitive decline, as
well as to any sudden changes such as a hip fracture.
Researchers and developers should pay attention to the
combination of biological, physiological, medical aspects
and robotics to develop intelligent cognitive robots for
assistive service.
Development of empirical models of social behaviour in a
smart space, to enable context awareness of participants
and environment.
Proper framework for system coordination, components
integration, service allocation, and knowledge sharing to
support the operation of heterogeneous groups of AAL
components.

247

 A set of global standards for a AAL service architecture
enabling individual application development for a networked ecology of sensors, robots, mobile devices and
data resources.
On the other side there are still gaps and obstacles
between innovative AAL systems and different aspects of
participants within the system. In the future, more user
studies should be performed regarding the acceptance of
AAL services and devices by the users, usability as well as
the users' expectations of such assistive services. It is also
essential to bring together all the stakeholders and enable
the very important networking between policy makers,
developers, producers, service providers, end user organisations, designers, health professionals (medical doctors,
psychologists, rehabilitation nurse, etc.), sociologists, home
carers, older adults and other potential end user groups.
In addition to the technological aspect of AAL, security
and privacy problems have to be addressed. Within a complex
networked system, a multitude of personal data will be
collected. The future AAL systems should employ a variety
of security methods based on biometric and physiological
features to safeguard user privacy. Different levels of security
should be granted to different users in such complex systems.

Acknowledgement
This research is ﬁnancially supported by the EU COALAS
project. The COALAS project has been selected in the
context of the INTERREG IVA France (Channel) – England
European cross-border co-operation programme, which is
co-ﬁnanced by the ERDF.

References
[1] B. Mirkin, M.B. Weinberger, The Demography of Population
Ageing, 2010.
[2] WHO, Global Health and Aging, Technical Report, National
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, 2011.
[3] Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division, United Nations, World Population Ageing: 1950–2050.
URL 〈http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worl
dageing19502050〉, 2013 (accessed on April 5, 2015).
[4] Population Reference Bureau, Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on
a European initiative on Alzheimer's Disease and Other
Dementias. URL 〈http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_informa
tion/dissemination/documents/com2009_380_en.pdf〉, 2009
(accessed on April 5, 2015).
[5] Population Reference Bureau, America's Aging Population.
URL
〈http://www.prb.org/pdf11/aging-in-america.pdf〉,
2011 (accessed on April 5, 2015).
[6] The Alzheimer's Association, 2013 Alzheimer's Disease Facts
and Figures. URL 〈http://www.alz.org/downloads/facts_ﬁ
gures_2013.pdf〉, 2013 (accessed on April 5, 2015).
[7] H. Nakashima, H. Aghajan, J. Augusto, Handbook of Ambient
Intelligence and Smart Environments, IOS Press, Amsterdam,
2010.
[8] G. Van Den Broek, F. Cavallo, C. Wehrmann, AALIANCE
Ambient Assisted Living Roadmap, IOS Press, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 2010.
[9] F. Müller, M. Lipprandt, M. Eichelberg, A. Helmer, C. Busch,
D. Willemsen, A. Hein, AAL in Cardiac Rehabilitation, in:

248

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]
[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

R. Li et al.
Handbook of Ambient Assisted Living, IOS Press, Amsterdam,
2012, pp. 512–534.
European Innovation Partnership on Active and Healthy
Ageing (EIP on AHA). URL 〈http://ec.europa.eu/health/age
ing/innovation/index_en.htm〉, 2015 (accessed on April 5,
2015).
F. Müller, M. Lipprandt, M. Eichelberg, A. Helmer, C. Busch,
D. Willemsen, A. Hein, Handbook of Ambient Assisted Living,
IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2012.
R. Raya, E. Rocon, E. Urendes, M. Velasco, A. Clemotte,
R. Ceres, Assistive robots for physical and cognitive rehabilitation in cerebral palsy, in: Intelligent Assistive Robots,
Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2015, pp. 133–156.
K. Sakamura, Smart living environment: ubiquitous computing approach based on TRON architecture, in: Handbook of
Ambient Assisted Living, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2012, p. 469.
Tron Project, URL 〈http://www.t-engine.org/tron-project〉;
2014 (accessed on April 5, 2015).
T. Yamazaki, The ubiquitous home, Int. J. Smart Home 1 (1)
(2007) 17–22.
B. Adaptation, T. Sato, T. Harada, T. Mori, Environment-type
robot system “RoboticRoom” featured by behavior media,
behavior contents, and behavior adaptation, IEEE/ASME
Trans. Mechatronics 9 (3) (2004) 529–534.
M. Obach, P. Barralon, E. León, R&D projects related to all in
tecnalia‘s health technologies unit, in: Handbook of Ambient
Assisted Living, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2012, pp. 693–723.
B. Brumitt, B. Meyers, J. Krumm, EasyLiving: technologies for
intelligent environments, in: Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1927,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000.
S. Intille, The goal: smart people, not smart homes, in: The
Fourth International Conference on Smart Homes and Health
Telematics, 2006.
J. Ho, S.S. Intille, Using context-aware computing to reduce
the perceived burden of interruptions from mobile devices,
In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems—CHI ’05, 2005, p. 909.
D. Cook, Collecting and disseminating smart home sensor
data in the CASAS project, in: Proceedings of the CHI
Workshop on Developing Shared Home Behavior Datasets to
Advance HCI and Ubiquitous Computing Research, 2009.
D. Cook, A. Crandall, B. Thomas, N. Krishnan, CASAS: a smart
home in a box, Computer, 46 (07) (2013) 62–69.
A. Aztiria, G. Farhadi, H. Aghajan, User behavior shift
detection in intelligent environments, in: Ambient Assisted
Living and Home Care, 2012, pp. 1–8.
C. Kidd, R. Orr, G. Abowd, The aware home: a living
laboratory for ubiquitous computing research, in: Cooperative Buildings. Integrating Information, Organizations, and
Architecture, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1670,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1999, pp. 1–9.
D. Cook, M. Youngblood, E. Heierman, K. Gopalratnam,
S. Rao, A. Litvin, F. Khawaja, MavHome: an agent-based
smart home, In: Proceedings of the First IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications,
2003 (PerCom 2003), IEEE Computer Society, Texas, 2003,
pp. 521–524.
E. Maier, G. Kempter, ALADIN—a magic lamp for the elderly?
in: Handbook of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 1201–1227.
H. Hagras, V. Callaghan, M. Colley, G. Clarke, A. PoundsCornish, H. Duman, Creating an ambient-intelligence environment using embedded agents, IEEE Intell. Syst. 19 (06)
(2004) 12–20.
A. Cesta, G. Cortellessa, M.V. Giuliani, et al., The RoboCare
Assistive Home Robot: Environment, Features and

[29]

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

Evaluation. The RoboCare Technical Reports, Technical
Report, National Research Council of Italy, 2006.
K. Annemarie, H. Huosheng, P. Matthew, Sysiass—an intelligent powered wheelchair, in: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Systems and Computer Science,
2012.
F. Müller, P. Hoffmann, M. Frenken, A. Hein, O. Herzog, Lsw:
Networked home automation in living environments, in:
Ambient Assisted Living, Advanced Technologies and Societal
Change, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 19–34.
F. Doctor, H. Hagras, V. Callaghan, A fuzzy embedded agentbased approach for realizing ambient intelligence in intelligent inhabited environments, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern.
Part A: Syst. Hum. 35 (1) (2005) 55–65.
A. Cesta, L. Iocchi, G.R. Leone, D. Nardi, Robotic, sensory
and problem-solving ingredients for the future home, in:
Intelligent Environments, Springer, London, 2009, pp. 69–89.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-84800-346-0.
A. Fides-Valero, M. Freddi, F. Furfari, M. Tazari, The PERSONA
framework for supporting context-awareness in open distributed systems, in: Ambient Intelligence, 2008, pp. 91–108.
A. Kameas, I. Calemis, Pervasive systems in health care, in:
Handbook of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments,
IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2010, pp. 315–346.
iCarer Project: Intelligent Care Guidance and Learning
Services Platform. URL 〈http://www.aal-europe.eu/pro
jects/icarer/〉, 2013 (accessed on April 5, 2015).
D. Pavel, V. Callaghan, A.K. Dey, Supporting wellbeing
through improving interactions and understanding in selfmonitoring systems, in: Handbook of Ambient Assisted Living,
Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, vol. 11, IOS
Press, Amsterdam, 2012, pp. 408–433.
J. Oresko, Z. Jin, J. Cheng, S. Huang, Y. Sun, H. Duschl,
A.C. Cheng, A wearable smartphone-based platform for realtime cardiovascular disease detection via electrocardiogram
processing, IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 14 (3) (2010)
734–740.
W.A. Khan, M. Hussain, M. Afzal, M.B. Amin, S. Lee,
Healthcare standards based sensory data exchange for Home
Healthcare Monitoring System, in: Conference Proceedings:
2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering
in Medicine and Biology Society, IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, 2012, pp. 1274–1277.
J. Corchado, J. Bajo, A. Abraham, GerAmi: improving
healthcare delivery in geriatric residences, IEEE Intell. Syst.
23 (2) (2008) 19–25.
K. Kitamura, T. Nemoto, Automatic sleep monitoring system
for home healthcare, in: Proceedings of 2012 IEEE-EMBS
International Conference on Biomedical and Health Informatics, IEEE, Hong Kong, 2012, pp. 894–897.
P. Pivato, S. Dalpez, D. Macii, D. Petri, A wearable wireless
sensor node for body fall detection, in: 2011 IEEE International Workshop on Measurements and Networking Proceedings (M&N), 2011, pp. 116–121.
D. Meersman, F. Hadzic, J. Hughes, I. Razo-Zapata, P. De
Leenheer, Health service discovery and composition in ambient assisted living: the Australian type 2 diabetes case study,
in: 2013 46th Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS), 2013, pp. 1337–1346.
J. Boger, A. Mihailidis, The future of intelligent assistive
technologies for cognition: devices under development to
support independent living and aging-with-choice, NeuroRehabilitation 28 (3) (2011) 271–280.
H. Chaminda, V. Klyuev, K. Naruse, A smart reminder system
for complex human activities, in: 2012 14th International
Conference on Advanced Communication Technology
(ICACT), 2012, pp. 235–240.

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey
[45] L. Bellodi, R. Jasinschi, G. de Haan, M. Bulut, Dialogue
support for memory impaired people, in: Signal Information
Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference
(APSIPA ASC), 2012 Asia-Paciﬁc, 2012, pp. 1–4.
[46] T. O’Kane, J. O’Donoghue, J. Gallagher, A. Aftab, A. Casey,
G. Courtney, Electronic-early warning scorecard: an intelligent context aware decision making approach for patient
monitoring, in: Handbook of Ambient Assisted Living, Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, vol. 11, IOS Press,
Amsterdam, 2012, pp. 9–21.
[47] R.C. Simpson, Smart wheelchairs: a literature review, J.
Rehabil. Res. Dev. 42 (4) (2005) 423.
[48] G. Bourhis, P. Pino, Mobile robotics and mobility assistance
for people with motor impairments: rational justiﬁcation for
the VAHM Project, IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng. 4 (1) (1996) 7–12.
[49] R. Simpson, S. Levine, D. Bell, NavChair: an assistive wheelchair navigation system with automatic adaptation, in:
Assistive Technology and AI, 1998, pp. 235–255.
[50] N. Katevas, N. Sgouros, S. Tzafestas, G. Papakonstantinou,
P. Beattie, J. Bishop, P. Tsanakas, D. Koutsouris, The autonomous mobile robot scenario: a sensor aided intelligent
navigation system for powered wheelchairs, IEEE Robot.
Autom. Mag. 4 (4) (1997) 60–70.
[51] H.A. Yanco, T Wheelesley: a robotic wheelchair system:
indoor navigation and user interface, in: Assistive Technology
and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, vol. 1458, 1998, pp.
256–268. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BFb0055983.
[52] R. Cooper, G. Grindle, J. Vazquez, Personal Mobility and
manipulation appliance—design, development, and initial
testing, Proc. IEEE (2012).
[53] S. Wang, L. Chen, H. Hu, K. McDonald-Maier, Doorway passing
of an intelligent wheelchair by dynamically generating Bézier
curve trajectory, in: IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Biomimetics, 2012, pp. 1206–1211.
[54] J.C. Augusto, Smart Homes as a Vehicle for AAL, in: Handbook of Ambient Assisted Living, Ambient Intelligence and
Smart Environments, vol. 11, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2012,
pp. 387–388.
[55] T. Carlson, Y. Demiris, Collaborative control for a robotic
wheelchair: evaluation of performance, attention, and workload, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part B Cybern. 42 (3)
(2012) 876–888.
[56] C. Montella, M. Pollock, D. Schwesinger, J. Spletzer, Stochastic classiﬁcation of urban terrain for smart wheelchair
navigation, in: Proceedings of the IROS Workshop on Progress,
Challenges and Future Perspectives in Navigation and Manipulation Assistance for Robotic Wheelchair, 2012.
[57] M. Bähr, S. Klein, S. Diewald, C. Haag, G. Hofstetter, M.
Khoury, D. Kurz, A. Winkler, A. König, N. Holzer, M. Siegrist,
A. Pressler, L. Roalter, T. Linner, M. Heuberger, K. Wessig, M.
Kranz, T. Bock, Passage: personalized mobility, assistance
and service systems in an ageing society, in: Ambient Assisted
Living, Advanced Technologies and Societal Change, Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 109–119.
[58] K. Boniface, M.P. McKay, R. Lucas, A. Shaffer, N. Sikka,
Serious injuries related to the segway personal transporter: a
case series, Ann. Emerg. Med. 57 (4) (2011) 370–374.
[59] M. Wada, Holonomic and omnidirectional wheelchairs with
synchronized 4WD mechanism, in: 2007 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2007,
pp. 1196–1202.
[60] T. George, G. Shalu, K. Sivanandan, Sensing, processing and
application of EMG signals for HAL (hybrid assistive limb), in:
International Conference on Sustainable Energy and Intelligent Systems (SEISCON 2011), 2011, pp. 749–753.
[61] M. Hirai, T. Tomizawa, S. Muramatsu, M. Sato, S. Kudoh, T.
Suehiro, Development of an intelligent mobility scooter, in:

249

[62]

[63]

[64]

[65]
[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]

[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

2012 International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), 2012, pp. 46–52.
B. Krieg-BrÅckner, C. Mandel, C. Budelmann, B. Gersdorf, A.
Martnez, Indoor and outdoor mobility assistance, in: Ambient
Assisted Living, Advanced Technologies and Societal Change,
Springer International Publishing, New York, USA, 2015,
pp. 33–52.
Ofcom Consumer Panel UK, Social Inclusion and Communications: A Review of the Literature, 2007 (accessed on April 5,
2015).
A. Gárate, N. Herrasti, A. López, GENIO—an ambient Intelligence application in home automation and entertainment
environment, In: Proceedings of the 2005 Joint Conference
on Smart Objects and Ambient Intelligence Innovative
Context-Aware Services: Usages and Technologies, ACM
Press, New York, NY, USA, 2005, p. 241.
Host Project, URL 〈http://www.host-aal.eu/〉, 2014
(accessed on April 5, 2015).
J. Doyle, Z. Skrba, R. McDonnell, B. Arent, Designing a touch
screen communication device to support social interaction
amongst older adults, in: Proceedings of the 24th BCS
Interaction Specialist Group Conference, BCS '10, British
Computer Society, Swinton, UK, 2010, pp. 177–185.
C. Leonardi, C. Mennecozzi, F. Pianesi, M. Zancanaro,
Supporting older adults social network: the design of
e-inclusion communication services, in: Proceedings of the
Sixth Interaction Conference of International Society for
Gerontechnology, ISG 2008, 2008.
P. Ahonen, P. Alahuhta, B. Daskala, S. Delaitre, P.D. Hert,
R. Lindner, I. Maghiros, A. Moscibroda, W. Schreurs,
M. Verlinden, Safeguards in a World of Ambient Intelligence.
The International Library of Ethics, Law and Technology,
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2010.
B.-H. Busch, R. Welge, Unobtrusive respiratory rate detection within homecare scenarios, in: Ambient Assisted Living,
Advanced Technologies and Societal Change, Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 61–78.
A. Schaar, M. Zieﬂe, Smart clothing: perceived beneﬁts vs.
perceived fears, in: 2011 5th International Conference on
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2011, pp. 601–608.
T. Hori, Y. Nishida, H. Aizawa, S. Murakami, H. Mizoguchi,
Sensor network for supporting elderly care home, In: Proceedings of IEEE Sensors 2004, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 575–578.
M. Chan, D. Estève, J.-Y. Fourniols, C. Escriba, E. Campo,
Smart wearable systems: current status and future challenges, Artif. Intell. Med. 56 (3) (2012) 137–156.
D.J. Cook, L.B. Holder, Sensor selection to support practical
use of health-monitoring smart environments, in: Handbook
of Ambient Assisted Living, Ambient Intelligence and Smart
Environments, vol. 11, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2012, pp. 434–
450.
T. Gentry, Smart home technologies for people with cognitive
impairment: an affordable, rehabilitative approach, in: Handbook of Ambient Assisted Living, Ambient Intelligence and
Smart Environments, vol. 11, IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2012,
pp. 535–548.
R. Blasco, Á. Marco, R. Casas, D. Cirujano, R. Picking, A smart
kitchen for ambient assisted living, Sensors 14 (1) (2014)
1629–1653. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s140101629.
T. Linner, B. Ellmann, T. Bock, Ubiquitous Life Support
Systems for an Ageing Society in Japan, Ambient Assisted
Living, 2011.
M.D. Rodríguez, J. Favela, E.a. Martínez, M.a. Muñoz,
Location-aware access to hospital information and services,
IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed. 8 (4) (2004) 448–455.

250
[78] I. González Alonso, M. Fernández, J.M. Maestre, M.d.P.
A. García Fuente, Service Robotics within the Digital Home,
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2011.
[79] A. Chibani, A. Bikakis, T. Patkos, Y. Amirat, S. Bouznad, N.
Ayari, L. Sabri, Using cognitive ubiquitous robots for assisting
dependent people in smart spaces, in: Intelligent Assistive
Robots, Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, vol. 106,
Springer International Publishing, New York, USA, 2015,
pp. 297–316.
[80] M.E. Pollack, L. Brown, D. Colbry, C. Orosz, B. Peintner, S.
Ramakrishnan, S. Engberg, J.T. Matthews, J. Dunbar-Jacob,
C.E. McCarthy, et al., Pearl: a mobile robotic assistant for the
elderly, in: AAAI Workshop on Automation as Eldercare, vol.
2002, 2002, pp. 85–91.
[81] H. Huttenrauch, K. Severinson Eklundh, Fetch-and-carry with
CERO: observations from a long-term user study with a
service robot, in: Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International
Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication,
2002, pp. 158–163.
[82] T. Suzuki, Y. Jose, Y. Nakauchi, Impression difference
between intelligent medicine case and small service robot
in self-medication support situations, J. Robot. Mechatronics
25 (5) (2013) 855–862.
[83] J. Fasola, M. Mataric, A socially assistive robot exercise
coach for the elderly, J. Hum.-Robot Interact. 2 (2) (2013)
3–32.
[84] S. Ushio, K. Okada, Y. Kido, T. Kitahara, H. Tsuji,
S. Moriguchi, M. Narita, Y. Kato, A home security service
robot system using the network service platform and its
implementation, In: Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE/IPSJ
International Symposium on Applications and the Internet,
SAINT '11, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA,
2011, pp. 402–407.
[85] K. Wada, Y. Ikeda, K. Inoue, R. Uehara, Development and
preliminary evaluation of a caregiver's manual for robot
therapy using the therapeutic seal robot Paro, in: The 19th
International Symposium in Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, 2010, pp. 533–538.
[86] W. Stiehl, C. Breazeal, A sensitive skin for robotic companions featuring temperature, force, and electric ﬁeld sensors, in: 2006 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2006, pp. 1952–1959.
[87] A. Libin, E. Libin, Person-robot interactions from the robopsychologists' point of view: the robotic psychology and
robotherapy approach, Proc. IEEE 92 (11) (2004) 1789–1803.
[88] E. Ohkubo, T. Negishi, Y. Oyamada, R. Kimura, M. Naganuma,
Studies on necessary condition of companion robot in the RAA
application, In: Proceedings of 2003 IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation. Computational Intelligence in Robotics and
Automation for the New Millennium (Cat. No.03EX694), vol.
1, IEEE, Tokyo, 2003, pp. 102–106.
[89] E. Libin, A. Libin, New diagnostic tool for robotic psychology
and robotherapy studies, CyberPsychol. Behav. (2003).
[90] A. Krolak, P. Strumillo, Vision-based eye blink monitoring
system for human–computer interfacing, in: 2008 Conference
on Human System Interactions, IEEE, 2008, pp. 994–998.
[91] L. Ren, L. Wang, J. K. Mills, D. Sun, 3-D automatic microassembly by vision-based control, in: 2007 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE,
2007, pp. 297–302.
[92] Y. Tang, Y. Li, T. Bai, X. Zhou, Human tracking in thermal
catadioptric omnidirectional vision, in: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Information and Automation, IEEE,
2011, pp. 97–102.
[93] F. Faion, S. Friedberger, A. Zea, U.D. Hanebeck, Intelligent
sensor-scheduling for multi-kinect-tracking, 2012 IEEE/RSJ

R. Li et al.

[94]
[95]

[96]
[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]
[101]
[102]

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]
[111]

[112]

International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
2012, pp. 3993–3999.
L. Garber, Gestural technology: moving interfaces in a new
direction [technology news], Computer 46 (10) (2013) 22–25.
K. Sabir, C. Stolte, B. Tabor, S.I. O’Donoghue, The molecular
control toolkit: controlling 3D molecular graphics via gesture
and voice, in: 2013 IEEE Symposium on Biological Data
Visualization (BioVis), IEEE, 2013, pp. 49–56.
R. Blatt, S. Ceriani, Brain control of a smart wheelchair, in:
Intelligent Autonomous Systems, vol. 10, ISO Press, 2008.
I. González Alonso, M. Fernández, J.M. Maestre, M.d.P.
A. García Fuente, Service Robotics within the Digital Home,
Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2011.
M. Broxvall, M. Gritti, A. Safﬁotti, PEIS Ecology: integrating
robots into smart environments, in: Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, IEEE, 2006,
pp. 212–218.
R. Borja, J. de la Pinta, A. Álvarez, J. Maestre, Integration of
service robots in the smart home by means of UPnP: a
surveillance robot case study, Robot. Auton. Syst. 61 (2)
(2012) 153–160.
J. Newmarch, Upnp Services and Jini Clients, Information
Systems: New Generations (ISNG 2005), Las Vegas.
Z. Shelby, Embedded web services, IEEE Wirel. Commun. 17
(6) (2010) 52–57.
Y. Song, B. Han, X. Zhang, D. Yang, Modeling and simulation
of smart home scenarios based on Internet of Things, in: 2012
Third IEEE International Conference on Network Infrastructure and Digital Content, IEEE, 2012, pp. 596–600.
M.C. Domingo, An overview of the Internet of Things for
people with disabilities, J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 35 (2) (2012)
584–596.
A.J. Jara, M.a. Zamora, A.F. Skarmeta, Knowledge acquisition
and management architecture for mobile and personal health
environments based on the internet of things, in: 2012 IEEE
11th International Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy
in Computing and Communications, 2012, pp. 1811–1818.
P. Melillo, P. Scala, F. Crispino, L. Pecchia, Cloud-based
remote processing and data-mining platform for automatic
risk assessment in hypertensive patients, in: Ambient Assisted
Living and Daily Activities, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 8868, Springer International Publishing, New
York, 2014, pp. 155–162.
M.Z. Bjelica, B. Mrazovac, N. Teslic, I. Papp, D. Stefanovic,
Cloud-enabled home automation gateway with the support
for UPnP over IPv4/IPv6 and 6LoWPAN, in: 2012 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), IEEE, Hue,
Vietnam, 2012, pp. 520–521.
A. Maiti, S. Sivanesan, Cloud controlled intrusion detection
and burglary prevention stratagems in home automation
systems, in: 2012 Second Baltic Congress on Future Internet
Communications, 2012, pp. 182–186.
N. Jennings, K. Sycara, M. Wooldridge, A roadmap of agent
research and development, Auton. Agents Multi-Agent Syst.
38 (1998) 7–38.
D. Cook, M. Youngblood, S. Das, A multi-agent approach to
controlling a smart environment, in: Designing Smart Homes,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4008, Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 165–182.
D. Cook, Multi-agent smart environments, J. Ambient Intell.
Smart Environ. 1 (2009) 47–51.
G.Y. Sato, H.J.S. Azevedo, J.-P.a. Barthès, Agent and multiagent applications to support distributed communities of
practice: a short review, Auton. Agents Multi-Agent Syst. 25
(1) (2011) 87–129.
B. Lopez, A. Pla, D. Daroca, Medical equipment maintenance
support with service-oriented multi-agent services, in:

Cognitive assisted living ambient system: a survey

[113]

[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]

[118]

[119]

[120]

[121]

[122]

[123]

[124]

[125]

[126]

[127]

[128]

[129]

Principles and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems, vol. 7057,
2012, pp. 487–498.
R. Li, M. Oskoei, H. Hu, Towards ros based multi-robot
architecture for ambient assisted living, in: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC),
2013, pp. 3458–3463.
G. Becerra, R. Kremer, Ambient intelligent environments and
environmental decisions via agent-based systems, J. Ambient
Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 2 (3) (2011) 185–200.
A. Sharpanskykh, J. Treur, An ambient agent architecture
exploiting automated cognitive analysis, J. Ambient Intell.
Humaniz. Comput. 3 (3) (2011) 219–237.
M. Valero, L. Vadillo, I. Pau, A. Pealver, An intelligent agents
reasoning platform to support smart home telecare, in:
Distributed Computing, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Bioinformatics,
Soft Computing, and Ambient Assisted Living, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 5518, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2009, pp. 679–686.
T. Stavropoulos, D. Vrakas, I. Vlahavas, A survey of service
composition in ambient intelligence environments, Artif.
Intell. Rev. (2013) 1–30.
N. Nijdam, S. Han, B. Kevelham, N. Magnenat-Thalmann, A
context-aware adaptive rendering system for user-centric
pervasive computing environments, in: MELECON 2010—2010
15th IEEE Mediterranean Electrotechnical Conference, 2010,
pp. 790–795.
M.W. Bewernitz, W.C. Mann, P. Dasler, P. Belchior, Feasibility
of machine-based prompting to assist persons with dementia,
Assist. Technol.: The Ofﬁcial Journal of RESNA 21 (4) (2009)
196–207.
B. Pogorelc, Z. Bosnić, M. Gams, Automatic recognition of
gait-related health problems in the elderly using machine
learning, Multimed. Tools Appl. 58 (2) (2011) 333–354.
I. Mocanu, A. Florea, A model for activity recognition and
emergency detection in smart environments, in: The First
International Conference on Ambient Computing, Applications, Services and Technologies, 2011, pp. 13–19.
L. Chen, C. Nugent, J. Rafferty, Ontology-based activity
recognition framework and services, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Information Integration and Web-based
Applications & Services—IIWAS '13, 2013, pp. 463–469.
T. Choudhury, G. Borriello, The mobile sensing platform: an
embedded activity recognition system, IEEE Pervas. Comput.
7 (2) (2008) 32–41.
V. Vaidehi, R. Bhargavi, K. Ganapathy, C. Sweetlin Hemalatha, Multi-sensor based in-home health monitoring using
complex event processing, in: 2012 International Conference
on Recent Trends in Information Technology, IEEE, Tamil
Nadu, India, 2012, pp. 570–575.
H. Ko, C. Ramos, A survey of context classiﬁcation for
intelligent systems research for ambient intelligence, in:
2010 International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and
Software Intensive Systems, IEEE, Krakow, Poland, 2010,
pp. 746–751.
X.-Q. Cao, Z.-Q. Liu, Human motion detection using Markov
random ﬁelds, J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 1 (3)
(2010) 211–220.
Y. Zhao, X. Wang, M. Goubran, T. Whalen, E.M. Petriu, Human
emotion and cognition recognition from body language of the
head using soft computing techniques, J. Ambient Intell.
Humaniz. Comput. 4 (1) (2012) 121–140.
J. Hong, J. Ramos, C. Shin, A. Dey, An activity recognition
system for ambient assisted living environments, in: Evaluating AAL Systems Through Competitive Benchmarking,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 148–158.
A. Bikakis, T. Patkos, G. Antoniou, D. Plexousakis, A survey of
semantics-based approaches for context reasoning in ambient
intelligence, in: Constructing Ambient Intelligence,

251

[130]

[131]

[132]

[133]

[134]

[135]

[136]

[137]
[138]

[139]
[140]

[141]

[142]

[143]

[144]

[145]

Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol.
11, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 14–23.
A. Hristova, A.M. Bernardos, J.R. Casar, Context-aware
services for ambient assisted living: a case-study, in: 2008
First International Symposium on Applied Sciences on Biomedical and Communication Technologies, IEEE, San Francisco,
California, USA, 2008, pp. 1–5.
T. Zentek, A. Marinc, A. Rashid, Methods and tools for
ontology-based conﬁguration processes of AAL environments,
in: Ambient Assisted Living, Advanced Technologies and
Societal Change, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014,
pp. 213–224.
I. Horrocks, P.F. Patel-Schneider, F. van Harmelen, From SHIQ
and RDF to OWL: the making of a Web Ontology Language,
Web Semant.: Sci. Serv. Agents World Wide Web 1 (1) (2003)
7–26.
B.C. Grau, I. Horrocks, B. Motik, B. Parsia, P. Patel-Schneider,
U. Sattler, OWL 2: the next step for OWL, Web Semant.: Sci.
Serv. Agents World Wide Web 6 (4) (2008) 309–322.
O. Strnad, A. Felic, A. Schmidt, Context management for
self-adaptive user interfaces in the project MyUI, in: Ambient
Assisted Living, Advanced Technologies and Societal Change,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 263–272.
C. Schlenoff, A. Pietromartire, Z. Kootbally, S. Balakirsky, S.
Foufou, Ontology-based state representations for intention
recognition in human–robot collaborative environments,
Robot. Auton. Syst. (2013).
N. Blodow, L.C. Goron, Z.-C. Marton, D. Pangercic, T. Ruhr, M.
Tenorth, M. Beetz, Autonomous semantic mapping for robots
performing everyday manipulation tasks in kitchen environments, in: 2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE, San Francisco, California,
USA, 2011, pp. 4263–4270.
C. Galindo, J. Fernández-Madrigal, Robot task planning using
semantic maps, Robot. Auton. Syst. (2008) 955–966.
B. Lorenz, H. Ohlbach, E. Stoffel, A hybrid spatial model for
representing indoor environments, in: Web and Wireless
Geographical Information Systems, 2006, pp. 102–112.
A. Pronobis, P. Jensfelt, K. Sjöö, H. Zender, Semantic modelling of space, in: Cognitive Systems, 2010, pp. 165–221.
A. Marinc, C. Stockloew, S. Tazari, 3D interaction in AAL
environments based on ontologies, in: Ambient Assisted
Living, Advanced Technologies and Societal Change, Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 289–302.
F. Amigoni, M. Neri, An application of ontology technologies to
robotic agents, in: IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on
Intelligent Agent Technology, IEEE, Singapore, 2005, pp. 751–
754.
A.J. Jara, F.J. Blaya, M.A. Zamora, A.F.G. Skarmeta, An
ontology and rule based intelligent information system to
detect and predict myocardial diseases, in: 2009 Ninth
International Conference on Information Technology and
Applications in Biomedicine, IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–6.
R. Welge, B.-H. Busch, K. Kabitzsch, J. Laurila-Dürsch,
S. Heusinger, M. Lipprandt, M. Eichelberg, E. Eichenberg,
H. Engelien, M. Gök, G. Moritz, A. Hein, T. Dutz, AAL-Onto: a
formal representation of RAALI integration proﬁles, in:
Ambient Assisted Living, Advanced Technologies and Societal
Change, Springer International Publishing, New York, USA,
2015, pp. 89–102.
N. Andreas, O. Wulf, K. Lingemann, J. Hertzberg, B. Wagner,
H. Surmann, A. Nüchter, 3D mapping with semantic knowledge, in: RoboCup 2005: Robot Soccer World Cup IX, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4020, Springer, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 335–346.
C. Premebida, U. Nunes, Fusing LIDAR, camera and semantic
information: a context-based approach for pedestrian detection, Int. J. Robot. Res. 32 (3) (2013) 371–384.

252
[146] R. Welge, B.-H. Busch, K. Kabitzsch, J. Laurila-Epe,
S. Heusinger, M. Lipprandt, M. Eichelberg, E. Eichenberg,
H. Engelien, M. Goek, G. Moritz, A. Hein, Representation of
integration proﬁles using an ontology, in: Ambient Assisted
Living, Advanced Technologies and Societal Change, Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 195–212.
[147] P. Bellavista, A. Corradi, M. Fanelli, L. Foschini, A survey of
context data distribution for mobile ubiquitous systems, ACM
Comput. Surv. 44 (4) (2012) 1–45.
[148] D. Falessi, G. Cantone, R. Kazman, P. Kruchten, Decisionmaking techniques for software architecture design, ACM
Comput. Surv. 43 (4) (2011) 1–28.
[149] F. Sadri, Ambient intelligence: a survey, ACM Comput. Surv.
43 (4) (2011) 1–66.
[150] J. Allen, Planning as temporal reasoning., In: Proceedings of
the Second International Conference on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, 1991, pp. 1–13.
[151] G. Kruijff, M. Brenner, Modelling spatio-temporal comprehension in situated human-robot dialogue as reasoning about
intentions and plans, in: AAAI Spring Symposium: Intentions in
Intelligent Systems, 2007.
[152] J. Young, N. Hawes, Predicting situated behaviour using
sequences of abstract spatial relations, In: Proceedings of
the AAAI 2013 Fall Symposium How Should Intelligence be
Abstracted in AI Research: MDPs, Symbolic Representations,
Artiﬁcial Neural Networks, 2013.
[153] F. Pecora, M. Cirillo, F.D. Osa, J. Ullberg, A. Safﬁotti, A
constraint-based approach for proactive, context-aware
human support, J. Ambient Intell. Smart Environ. 4 (2012)
347–367.
[154] J. Ullberg, A. Loutﬁ, F. Pecora, Towards continuous activity
monitoring with temporal constraints, In: Proceedings of the
Fourth Workshop on Planning and Plan Execution for RealWorld Systems at ICAPS09, 2009.
[155] S. Begum, M. Ahmed, P. Funk, N. Xiong, M. Folke, Case-based
reasoning systems in the health sciences: a survey of recent
trends and developments, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part
C: Appl. Rev. 41 (4) (2011) 421–434.
[156] D. Tapia, J. Bajo, J. Sánchez, J. Corchado, An ambient
intelligence based multi-agent architecture, In: Proceedings
of the International Conference on Ambient Intelligence
Developments, Springer, Paris, 2008, pp. 68–78.
[157] S. Xefteris, V. Andronikou, K. Tserpes, T. Varvarigou, Casebased approach using behavioural biometrics aimed at
Assisted Living, J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 2 (2)
(2010) 73–80.

R. Li et al.
[158] F. Zhou, J. Jiao, S. Chen, D. Zhang, A case-driven ambient
intelligence system for elderly in-home assistance applications, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Part C: Appl. Rev. 41 (2)
(2011) 179–189.
[159] A. Moawad, A. Bikakis, P. Caire, G. Nain, Y. Le Traon, A rulebased contextual reasoning platform for ambient intelligence
environments, in: Theory, Practice, and Applications of Rules
on the Web, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8035,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 158–172.
[160] M. Valero, J. Bravo, J. García, D. López-de Ipiña, A. Gómez, A
knowledge based framework to support active aging at home
based environments, in: Ambient Assisted Living and Active
Aging, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8277,
Springer International Publishing, New York, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[161] V. Hirankitti, T.X. Mai, A meta-logical approach for reasoning
with an OWL 2 ontology, J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Comput.
3 (4) (2012) 293–303.
[162] M. Tenorth, M. Beetz, A uniﬁed representation for reasoning
about robot actions, processes, and their effects on objects,
in: 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, 2012, pp. 1351–1358.
[163] A. Kofod-Petersen, Challenges in case-based reasoning for
context awareness in ambient intelligent systems, in: The
Eighth European Conference on CaseBased Reasoning, Workshop Proceedings, 2006, pp. 1–13.
[164] A. Cesta, S. Fratini, The timeline representation framework
as a planning and scheduling software development environment, In: Proceedings of the 27th Workshop of the UK
Planning and Scheduling SIG, 2008.
[165] T. Tiberghien, M. Mokhtari, H. Aloulou, J. Biswas, Semantic
reasoning in context-aware assistive environments to support
ageing with dementia, in: The Semantic Web—ISWC 2012,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7650, Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2012, pp. 212–227.
[166] F. Castanedo, J. García, M.a. Patricio, J.M. Molina, A multiagent architecture based on the BDI model for data fusion in
visual sensor networks, J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 62 (3–4) (2010)
299–328.
[167] A.S. Rao, M.P. Georgeff, BDI agents: from theory to practice,
In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on
Multi-Agent Systems, AAAI, 1995, pp. 312–319.
[168] S. Sardina, L. Padgham, A BDI agent programming language
with failure handling, declarative goals, and planning, Auton.
Agents Multi-Agent Syst. 23 (1) (2010) 18–70.
[169] J. Bidot, S. Biundo, Artiﬁcial intelligence planning for ambient environments, in: Next Generation Intelligent Environments, Springer New York, 2011, pp. 195–225.

